arXiv:2506.06897v1  [nlin.AO]  7 Jun 2025
Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing
systems
Mahault Albarracin1,2,[0000−0003−0916−4645] and Dalton A R
Sakthivadivel1,3,[0000−0002−7907−7611]
1 VERSES Research Lab
2 D´ epartement d’informatique, Universit´ e du Qu´ ebec ` a Montr´ eal, Montr´ eal, Canada
3 Department of Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Centre, New York, NY 10016
dsakthivadivel@gc.cuny.edu
Abstract In this paper we will articulate a view of resilience under the
free energy principle and vice versa. The free energy principle is about
existence and identity, and resilience is the condition under which things
exist at all. In previous work this has been investigated as modelling
resilience using the free energy principle. We will extend that work by
making the case that self-organisation under the free energy principle is
about resilience, in the sense that identity is a constant process of self-
reconfiguration, implying the existence of a self-model and the energy
to reconfigure that self-model—and hence, the resilience of a maintained
identity under changes. A general framework for thinking about resilience
in this context will be sketched out and some models will be provided
using that framework.
Keywords: Resilience, adaptability, self-organisation, free energy prin-
ciple
1 Introduction
This paper is mainly concerned with the notions of identity and resilience which
are at stake when modelling adaptive systems. Self-organisation is implicitly
defined in terms of identity—that is, the self. However, it is also apparent that
self-organisation is never static, and the sense of identity implicit here must
somehow be flexible or else be capable of accommodating changes in the envir-
onment. In dissipative adaptation, for example, a system self-organises by re-
structuring itself to absorb and dissipate energy from an external source in the
environment [9,21,24,40]. This echoes enactive and autopoietic theories: living
systems produce and maintain themselves [28], and for an organism to main-
tain a model of itself and its environment, it must produce what is required
to preserve its generative model [29]. Maturana–Varela’s concept of autopoiesis
describes how a system continuously regenerates its components but also keeps
its identity intact—again encountering the tension we highlighted. This paper
aims to investigate what an appropriate description of this flexibility might be
and how can it can be modelled, and in particular, what resilience has to do
2 M Albarracin and D A R Sakthivadivel
with a changing identity in dynamic environments. We will develop a first idea
of a formalism to describe resilience and some simple models for how resilience
features in adaptive systems.
Adaptation is often achieved by, or can be modelled as, an inference process
[15,37,39,47,51]. An interesting example to study is the human brain. Modern
theoretical neuroscience asserts that the brain maintains an internal self-model
which is continuously refined as part of its predictive engagement with the world.
In predictive processing, an agent must model the causes of its sensory inputs to
respond to perturbations from the environment [12]. Since the agent’s own body,
traits, and actions are implicated in those causes, the brain encodes a model of
‘self’ to better predict incoming sensations [20]. In particular, Hohwy–Michael
suggest that people “perceive and maintain their selfhood by an internal model of
hierarchical endogenous (hidden) causes”, wherein higher-level causes like goals
and traits generate predictions that shape perception and action. It follows that
identity is embodied in the brain’s generative model and is continuously updated
by maximising model evidence and minimising prediction error, a process one
might call self-evidencing.
As discussed, maintaining an identity requires not just change but also a de-
gree of stability of core features, offering a conundrum. To self-evidence, an agent
learns and constantly adjusts a generative model of the world and of itself, using
sensory evidence to correct discrepancies. The brain expends informational and
energetic resources to keep its self-model aligned with reality—revising beliefs
or deploying actions when mismatches (prediction errors) arise. This continual
updating is the computational essence of self-reconfiguration. The self-model is
never static, because new experiences demand incorporation.
One way to resolve this tension is to view an agent as balancing accuracy
(updating to fit data) with precision or confidence in prior beliefs, as is done
in active inference [14,33]. Some self-model predictions— e.g. deeply held traits
or values—are high-precision priors that resist change, providing continuity of
identity. This balance is evident in psychology: people seek to preserve a coherent
self-concept in the face of discrepant information (the motive for self-consistency
or self-verification) even as they update other aspects of themselves over time
[34]. For example, individuals continuously gather self-relevant information to
build an inner ‘self-theory’, updating beliefs about themselves with feedback
from social and personal experiences. Over time, as a more stable self-concept
is consolidated, people begin to give greater weight to maintaining existing self-
beliefs, “at the expense of continuous updating”.
Altogether this implies that the “self” is not a static essence but a working
model, continually regenerated by the very organism it defines. To characterise
the malleability of certain aspects of identity and the rigidity of certain other
ones, we will frame it in terms of resilience. An identity (the organism’s self-
model) is sustained by ongoing self-production and error-correction—the same
processes that characterise resilience. Resilience generally refers to the capacity
of a system to withstand shocks or disturbances without losing its core functions
or identity [18,33,42].
Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems 3
The term resilience is polysemous: it encompasses at least three complement-
ary aspects [2,33]. It denotes (i) inertia—resistance to change when disturbed,
(ii) elasticity—the ability to rebound or restore a prior state after a deviation,
and (iii) plasticity—the capacity to flexibly reorganize or find new stable states
when conditions change. All three aspects describe processes rather than static
traits. Resilience is not simple a fixed quantity one has a certain amount of; it
is something one does, dynamically, over time.
The link between identity processes and resilience becomes apparent when
we consider what is maintaining or recovering in each case. In the face of life’s
perturbations—be it trauma, loss, illness, or rapid change—it is often one’s sense
of self and purpose that is challenged. Awareness and cognitive flexibility distin-
guish the more resilient phenotypes, allowing agents to anticipate and integrate
surprises without being overwhelmed. A resilient individual manages to hold
onto an integrated self-concept (core values, sense of meaning, self-esteem) or
to reconstruct a new one, such that they continue to function and grow. This
points to multiple scales of the self, akin to Russian dolls with varying degrees
of malleability—or rates of change.
Identity has been linked in different ways to resilience. the concepts have
porosity in the literature and a degree of metaphorical artistic license. Empirical
studies show clear connections between certain qualities of identity and resilience
outcomes. For instance, people who have more complex identities— i.e. who see
themselves in terms of multiple distinct roles or attributes—tend to be more
resilient to stress and negative events [4,49]. If one facet of the self is threatened,
a person with many facets can draw strength and continue to find self-worth in
other aspects, preventing a total collapse of self-regard. This flexibility in self-
concept, a form of adaptive reconfiguration of identity, is a protective factor.
Similarly, having a coherent but adaptable narrative identity (a life story that
makes meaning of difficulties) is associated with resilience [17,25]. Individuals
who can ‘re-story’ their lives after trauma, incorporating the adversity into their
identity as a survivor or as someone who has grown, often show better recovery
and even post-traumatic growth [32]. Conversely, a brittle and rigid identity will
lead an individual to not be able to recover from any major disruption.
Ultimately, it is the degree of continuity of identity which is paramount.
Breakwell (2021) introduced the notion of identity resilience within identity pro-
cess theory, defining it as “a relatively stable self-schema based on self-esteem,
self-efficacy, positive distinctiveness and continuity” that helps one cope with
threat [3]. In this sense, resilience can be seen as the successful management of
identity threats: maintaining core identity integrity whilst adapting aspects that
need to change.
Given the above, we can argue that the process of identity formation and
reconfiguration is inherently a resilience process.
In that context, a resilient response corrects a disturbance or accommodates
it by updating the self-model. This corresponds to elasticity and plasticity, with
resilient elasticity being an agent’s natural return to its characteristic states
(e.g. attractors) after a shock, and resilient plasticity being the possession of
4 M Albarracin and D A R Sakthivadivel
Figure 1.The Matryoshka doll exhibits a nested sense of identity. As time goes on,
defects and mutations in the outer dolls change their phenotypes. The innermost doll,
however, remains intact and constant.
Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems 5
functional redundancy or degeneracy— that is, multiple ways to achieve well-
being, or allowing flexible reorganisation.
Resilience-as-inertia, meanwhile, corresponds to holding very high-precision
beliefs that prevent change. In active inference, an agent with very precise self-
beliefs might appear ‘resilient’ in the sense of resisting influence (robust identity),
but could also verge on inflexibility. An agent with more degenerate solutions
(many possible adaptive states) can explore alternatives when one mode of being
is compromised. In psychology, this sense of resilience naturally emerges from the
concept of an enactive niche, the physical and social environment an individual
helps shape around themselves [19]. An agent might proactively seek supportive
relationships and stable routines (shaping their niche) to buffer against future
stressors, preserving their identity and well-being. The agent infers states of the
world and selects actions that keep them within a regulated zone, and those
actions simultaneously alter the environment in their favour.
Resilient adaptation can be seen as an ongoing negotiation of identity. The in-
dividual or system must decide what to hold onto and what to change in response
to perturbation. Maintaining functional integrity might mean preserving certain
core self-aspects (values, roles) constant (inertia), while adaptive reorganisation
might mean transforming other aspects (adopting a new identity, goal, or belief
system) to accommodate new realities (plasticity).
2 A basic mathematical formalism
We can think of a system’s identity configuration or psychological state as a point
in a high-dimensional state space. Over time, as the system goes through typical
experiences, their state traces out a trajectory—essentially their equilibrium
or habitual behaviour. Resilience relates to what happens when the system is
pushed off this usual trajectory.
Certain configurations of the self may be stable attractors (basins of attrac-
tion) representing a well-integrated identity or mode of functioning. Perturb-
ations might nudge the system within the basin (from which it can return to
the attractor, recovery) or, if strong enough, knock the system into a different
basin (a qualitative shift in identity or functioning). This is analogous to how
ecosystems have multiple stable states; resilience is the difficulty of tipping the
ecosystem into an alternate state.
High-precision beliefs create deep attractors (inertia), whereas plasticity cre-
ates a flatter landscape with multiple smaller attractors, allowing movement to
new states. We will focus on the high-precision case first.
2.1 Inertia
We will begin by supposing we have a (uniformly Lipschitz continuous) time-
varying vector field V and a random variable satisfying
dXt = V (Xt, t) dt + Γ dWt , (1)
6 M Albarracin and D A R Sakthivadivel
in other words, fluctuating around the expected path ˆxt :=
Rt
0 V (Xs, s) ds, with
Γ a positive-definite matrix. We will assume Γ is independent of Xt for conveni-
ence; the same story we will tell can be told for state-dependent noise, but it is
considerably more complicated. Let |Γ| = det Γ >0. By a theorem of Friedlin–
Wentzell, the non-equilibrium measure over pathsp|Γ|(Xt) is given (to first order
in |Γ|−1) by
e− 1
|Γ|
R t
0 | ˙Xs−V (Xs,s)|
2
ds. (2)
Suppose p(Xt) is the Bayesian belief of an agent about its own states. Then
|Γ|−1 is the precision of that belief. When |Γ|−1 increases, the probability of
large fluctuations away from ˆxt decays exponentially. That is to say, as |Γ|−1
increases, time evolutions Xt that accumulate large distances from ˆxt in time are
penalised more and p(Xt) decreases. A formal computation reveals the following.
In the limit, we have
p∞(Xt) = e−∞
R t
0 | ˙Xs−V (Xs,s)|
2
ds
which is only non-zero when
Z t
0
 ˙Xs − V (Xs, s)

2
ds
vanishes, in which case it is e−∞·0 = 1. Another way to see this is as follows.
As |Γ|−1 → ∞, we have |Γ| →0, giving us a zero-noise limit. Then from (1) it
is immediate that the system does not fluctuate away from the expected path.
Since it is highly probable for the system to evolve near ˆ xt when precision is
high, it becomes a path-wise attractor. If the paths around the expected path
are all orbits through the same region of the state-space, it moreover becomes
an attractor in the state-space. As such, resilience in the inertial sense is high
self-precision.
Following [13,46] we will now articulate how this connects to the free energy
principle. First we will rehearse the FEP according to those references.
Let L be the log-probability. Suppose the system is coupled to some other
system, such as an environment. The free energy principle begins from the ob-
servation that the KL divergence
F(µt, bt) :=
Z
q(ηt; σ(µt)) logq(ηt; σ(µt)) dηt −
Z
q(ηt; σ(µt)) logp(ηt, bt, µt) dηt
decomposes as
DKL(q(ηt; σ(µt), p(ηt | bt)) + L(µt, bt).
Since the KL divergence is non-negative, we moreover have
DKL(q(ηt; σ(µt), p(ηt | bt)) + L(µt, bt) ⩾ L(µt, bt)
saturating at the modal path, or the expected path under the Laplace assump-
tion. A Taylor expansion arguments allows us to conclude
∇µtL(µt, bt) = 0 ⇐⇒ ∇µtF(µt, bt) = 0. (3)
Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems 7
Now we have licence to claim that the modal path encodes a variational inference
about the environment: it is the state for which the Lagrangian is minimised,
and hence, the parameter of the posterior distribution over external states for
which the variational free energy is minimised.
Conceptually this is a tautology. The free energy principle is a statement that
if a system is on an attractor then it looks as if it is minimising a variational
free energy and the dynamics on the attractor (as well as fluctuations around it)
can be modelled using whatever dynamical system is induced by approximate
Bayesian inference (regarded as a law of motion) [43, §2]. The fact that this
statement has a direction is crucial: we assume it is a ‘thing’ at the outset. Once
we have a thing, the FEP is a highly general method of modelling ‘things’ and
describing why they are things (in particular, the things that they are).
Now we will connect this to our argument. By (2), we have the surprisal or
rate function
−log p|Γ|(µt) = 1
|Γ|
Z t
0
| ˙µs − V (µs, s)|2 ds + o
 1
|Γ|

.
Minimising variational free energy also minimises this quantity by (3). Con-
sequently it increases precision.
We see that as beliefs about the environment become better approximations
of the distribution over environmental states, highly precise self-beliefs are af-
forded to the system, enabling it to remain close to characteristic trajectories
through state space. In the other direction, having highly precise self-beliefs de-
mands an accurate world model: if variational free energy cannot be minimised,
then neither can the surprisal, and the system will drift from its characteristic
trajectory.
This has a dual viewpoint under the principle of maximum entropy [45].
A constraint imposes acceptability or unacceptability on different states of the
system. It may imply the existence of a target morphology, or some desired
form driven by a function—something we may call a phenotype. This ultimately
coincides with what we have called an identity [26].
2.2 Plasticity
The previous section assumed the system was capable of forming a sufficiently
good model of the environment to minimise DKL. Recall that if variational free
energy cannot be minimised, then neither can the surprisal, and the system will
drift from its characteristic trajectory. As such, it must designate new traject-
ories as acceptable—its identity must be plastic. The notion of plasticity was
introduced to describe systems that are able to grow and change their charac-
teristic trajectory.
We will now work state-wise. Let us make the Laplace assumption such that
to every possible posterior over environmental states there is a unique associated
(mode, variance) pair. Suppose the statistics of the environment change. From
(3) it follows that a new mode must be chosen by the system. It is possible for
8 M Albarracin and D A R Sakthivadivel
a system to adjust the statistics of the environment to bring the corresponding
internal mode closer to a preference, but it is not always possible to exactly meet
those preferences.
Changing modes Recall that the mode is actually the conditionally expec-
ted mode given the blanket state. In effect, there is an entire suite of modes,
each a local minimum of the rate function on the joint state space offering
its own phase. Said differently, these modes offer different attractors or meta-
stable states. When the magnitude of a perturbation is too large, it may kick
the system off of one attractor and it may be caught in the well of another.
Whether one or another mode is acceptable depends on the statistics of the en-
vironment, so we have different phenotypes in different environmental parameter
regimes, with the choice of mode determined by some control parameter—here,
the blanket state. If we have a bidirectional coupling of the agent to its blanket,
e.g. dµt = V (µt, bt, t) dt + Γ dWt, then the mode of the internal states is also a
function of the external state via σ, and evolves along a trajectory going between
such metastable states. (Note the internal states cannot see the external states
directly, and any effect the environment has on the agent is mediated by the
blanket.)
A physical example of the situation we have in mind is that of a phase
transition. In a phase transition, the same Hamiltonian characterises a material,
but the typical dynamics are very different depending on the value of some
control parameter, and there is a sharp discontinuity between different phases.
A simple model thereof is the Ising model on a lattice Λ coupled to a heat
reservoir. There is an internal state—the spin configuration
s1s2s3 . . . s|Λ|

—an
external state—the state of the reservoir in the environment—and a blanket—the
physical interface between the material and the environment, and the heat bath
with temperature T between the system and whatever environmental dynamics
are taking place. Importantly, the heat bath is in contact with the material but
shrouds the environment from it, serving as a Markov blanket.
Assume there is some unknown but non-decreasing transfer function relat-
ing the environment to the heat bath. As the temperature of the environment
increases, the temperature of the heat bath also increases. Now the mode of the
system (its expected internal state) depends on T. The mode is the well-known
magnetisation function m(T). The mode encodes a posterior in the sense that
if the heat bath is hot then the environment likely does not contain any heat
sinks, and likely contains heat sources, or at least is in equilibrium with the heat
bath.
Though beyond the scope of this paper, it is interesting to note that large
deviations interact with metastability and phase transitions, following general
principles laid out in [36].
Free energy curvaturesWe also would like to model more continuous changes
in identity, not dependent on sharp discontinuities in a control parameter. If
the blanket state is constant or slowly changing, another route to exploring
Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems 9
different attractors and introducing local minima is decreasing the curvature of
the free energy functional. By a Taylor expansion argument, the curvature of
the free energy—the matrix of second derivatives of the KL divergence in the
parameters—is the Fisher information.
This has the interpretation that when the curvature of the free energy is high
in a certain direction, the system will find those directions more informative and
travel in those directions. That is to say, the Fisher information metric meas-
ures how much information each parameter carries about distinguishing between
nearby distributions. This is the opposite of intertial resilience in a precise sense:
under the Laplace assumption, the Fisher information is proportional to the pre-
cision (see e.g. [16] for a lengthier discussion), so that higher precision makes for
deeper curvatures, and hence stronger attractors. Indeed, for Gaussians, direc-
tions where the distribution has low variance—large eigenvalues of the precision
matrix—provide more information for parameter estimation, whilst directions
with high variance—small eigenvalues of the precision matrix—provide less in-
formation. By flattening the free energy landscape, the system is not offered
strong information from parameters and hence has little preference for what
variational posteriors to use, and is able to explore rather than being trapped in
a deep global minimum.
We claim that an adaptive system will find more effective ways to self-organise
when the free energy landscape is flatter. To justify this, note that the heat
dissipated is (see [38,47] for extended derivations)
q = −kBT∆F (µ, b)
where ∆ is the sum of unmixed second partials, or in other words, the trace of
the Hessian matrix.
If every change in µ is a new possible parameter, then the ∆F(µ, b) term
is the Fisher information. Since the trace of a square matrix is the sum of its
eigenvalues, the heat dissipated is proportional to the negative precision. It fol-
lows that low precision dissipates a larger amount of heat than high precision,
suggesting that when the curvature is small, self-organisation can be made more
energetically-efficient.
3 A model of complex adaptive processes
To recap, there are (so far) two different notions of resilience that have been
explored. In [33] these phenomena were distinguished as inertia and plasticity—
the ability to resist change, and the ability to respond to change, respectively. In
the previous subsection we discussed how a threshold for damage distinguishes
between these forms of resilience, in the sense of the continuity and discontinuity
of changes in configuration. There is something within active inference that
makes a stone rigid and tough, and something that makes a human vulnerable
but flexible. The task of this section is to find it.
One conjecture is that this threshold is an emergent effect of the distributed,
hierarchical nature of a complex system. A human can modularise and spread
10 M Albarracin and D A R Sakthivadivel
damage amongst many lower level processes to protect a higher-level process like
consciousness. Its identity is not stored in the configuration of a single level of
resolution. For example, a human being bleeds from many different capillaries
or arteries rather than a single heart. Contrast this with a cell, which has no
such highways and when punctured dies immediately; or a honeybee, which
has no blood vessels at all, and delivers oxygenated blood around its body by
diffusion. (Note that this tacitly assumes hierarchy implies modularity.) A similar
argument is made in [44] and is used in [33].
To that end we will discuss a hierarchical free-energy minimising system.
Consider a system with a suite of m internal states µ := {µ1, . . . , µm}, k active
and p sensory states {a1, . . . , ak, s1, . . . , sp} (for a total of k + p blanket states),
situated in an environment with n ≪ m states η := {η1, . . . , ηn}. Each state will
be given by a random variable evolving in time.
Under generic conditions there exists a mapping from the conditionally ex-
pected trajectory of µ given a, s to that of η,
σ : ˆµa,s 7→ ˆηa,s.
This mapping serves to relate the parameters of a conditional probability distri-
bution over external states to the expected state of the system,
P(η; ˆηa,s, Σa,s) = P(η; σ(ˆµa,s), Σa,s)
In our situation we have a redundancy in the parametrisation: some fraction of
the information in each ˆηi is mapped to each ˆµi. An example of this redundancy
is a human brain, where many more sensory neurones exist than environmental
features.
Similarly, suppose the internal states are grouped into v clusters, denoted
C := {C1, . . . , Cv}, each of which has a mode given by the most likely state
within the cluster. Suppose the mode of the cluster also parametrises some free
energy functional over environmental states. This may be over coarse-grained
features of the environment, or may simply be a cluster of repeated represent-
ations of the same feature. We will denote these external states as ˜ η. We will
also assume there is a corresponding possible difference in the blanket states of
interest, ˜b.
Let the empirical mean of a cluster of h states C be
ˆC = 1
h
hX
i
µi
and (under the Laplace assumption) let ˆC parameterise a distribution over ˜η by
DKL(q(˜η; ˜σ(C), p(˜η | ˜b)) + L(C,˜b).
All of our previous reasoning applies, so that the optimal state of the cluster is
E[C].
Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems 11
The probability of the sample mean of h iid normally distributed random
variables deviating from E[C] by ε can be estimated as
P( ˆC − E[C] ⩾ hε) ⩽ e−hε2
meaning that as h grows large, ˆC is exponentially likely to get closer and closer
to E[C]. Conceptually, as we have more and more states in the cluster, losing
a state makes less of an impact on how far the average of the cluster is to the
optimal parameter. That is to say: if some states are lost but there are sufficiently
many states, the mode of the cluster does not change a large amount. As such,
the higher level processes remain intact.
Though an adequate first idea, a more sophisticated argument would use
the relationship between metastability and multiscale large deviations estimates
[8,27] to expand this framework. We leave this to future work.
4 Closing remarks and a discussion of psychology
We hope the framework sketched in this paper will provide more effective ways
of modelling not only adaptive systems in physics but also the human brain and
emotions. Like the discussion here, classic and contemporary psychology frames
identity as an ongoing, adaptive process rather than a fixed entity. Symbolic
interactionist theories ( e.g. Mead’s and Cooley’s ideas of the self) emphasize
that identity forms through social feedback and iterative self-reflection [5,31].
A striking formalization comes from identity control theory in sociology, which
models each identity (e.g. role or group identity) as a homeostatic feedback loop
[7,23,48]. An identity includes a mental standard (the meanings and expectations
of being e.g. “a good parent” or “a proud student”), and individuals continuously
compare their perceived behaviour or feedback (input) to this internal standard
(comparator) [41,50], which is ultimately a form of sociometry [1].
If a discrepancy (error) is detected—say, others’ reactions suggest one is not
meeting the identity standard—the individual will adjust either their behaviour
or their identity perceptions to reduce the error. In effect, each identity acts as
a control system. It is meant to control internal and external perceptions by
making them congruent with the meanings of its identity standard. In this way,
any error is minimized. Identity is enacted and tuned in real time as situations
change. The individual’s self-model (their identity standard and current self-
perception) is thus iteratively revised to better match experience, or conversely,
they act on the world to make experience match their identity [35,52].
Identities can reorganize over longer timescales through processes like devel-
opmental crises or narrative reframing [6,22]. Erikson’s classic stages of iden-
tity formation and modern notions of narrative identity both see identity as an
evolving story, continuously edited to make sense of new chapters of life [11,30].
For instance, Epstein’s cognitive-experiential self theory posits that people gradu-
ally construct a self-schema from life experiences, which serves as a working
theory of who they are [10].
12 M Albarracin and D A R Sakthivadivel
Early in life this schema is highly malleable—young people update their self-
concept rapidly with new feedback—but as it stabilizes, they increasingly strive
to maintain coherence, sometimes by filtering or reinterpreting discrepant in-
formation rather than altering the self [34]. Consequently, a healthy identity
involves both change and consistency, akin to a ship that adjusts course in chan-
ging seas while keeping a steady direction. This dynamic is facilitated by cognit-
ive capacities (memory, reflection) and informational resources (feedback from
relationships, culture) that allow the person to revise their self-narrative when
needed. It also has an energetic aspect: adapting one’s identity—for instance,
during acculturation or personal transformation—can be effortful and emotion-
ally taxing, indicating that resilience of identity may depend on having adequate
emotional and cognitive energy to accommodate change.
All of these observations suggest a place for resilience in the free energy
principle—and more crucially, a reading of the free energy principle where resi-
lience is a key concept underwriting self-assembly and self-organisation.
References
1. Albarracin, M., Bouchard-Joly, G., Sheikhbahaee, Z., Miller, M., Pitliya, R.J., Poir-
ier, P.: Feeling our place in the world: an active inference account of self-esteem.
Neuroscience of Consciousness 2024(1), niae007 (2024)
2. Albarracin, M., Ramstead, M., Pitliya, R.J., Hipolito, I., Da Costa, L., Raffa, M.,
Constant, A., Manski, S.G.: Sustainability under active inference. Systems 12(5),
163 (2024)
3. Breakwell, G.M.: Identity resilience: Its origins in identity processes and its role in
coping with threat. Contemporary Social Science 16(5), 573–588 (2021)
4. Chen, J., Lau, C., Tapanya, S., Cameron, C.A.: Identities as protective processes:
Socio-ecological perspectives on youth resilience. Journal of Youth Studies 15(6),
761–779 (2012)
5. Cooley, C.H.: The looking-glass self. In: The Production of Reality: Essays and
Readings on Social Interaction, pp. 126–128. 6 edn. (1902)
6. Cˆ ot´ e, J.E.: The enduring usefulness of Erikson’s concept of the identity crisis in
the 21st century: An analysis of student mental health concerns. Identity 18(4),
251–263 (2018)
7. Deane, G.: Shape of subjectivity: an active inference approach to consciousness
and altered self-experience. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Edinburgh (2021)
8. Ellis, R.S.: The theory of large deviations: from Boltzmann’s 1877 calculation
to equilibrium macrostates in 2D turbulence. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena
133(1-4), 106–136 (1999)
9. England, J.L.: Dissipative adaptation in driven self-assembly. Nature Nanotechno-
logy 10(11), 919–923 (2015)
10. Epstein, S.: The self-concept revisited: Or a theory of a theory. American Psycho-
logist 28(5), 404 (1973)
11. Erg¨ un, N.: Identity development: Narrative identity and intergenerational narrat-
ive identity. Psikiyatride Guncel Yaklasimlar—Current Approaches in Psychiatry
12(4), 455–475 (2020)
12. Friston, K.: Prediction, perception and agency. International Journal of Psycho-
physiology 83(2), 248–252 (2012)
Resilience and adaptability in self-evidencing systems 13
13. Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sakthivadivel, D.A.R., Heins, C., Pavliotis, G.A., Ram-
stead, M., Parr, T.: Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange things. Physics
of Life Reviews 47, 35–62 (2023)
14. Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., Pezzulo, G.: Active in-
ference: a process theory. Neural Computation 29(1), 1–49 (2017)
15. Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., Pezzulo, G.: Knowing one’s place: a free-
energy approach to pattern regulation. Journal of the Royal Society Interface
12(105), 20141383 (2015)
16. Friston, K., Mattout, J., Trujillo-Barreto, N., Ashburner, J., Penny, W.: Variational
free energy and the Laplace approximation. Neuroimage 34(1), 220–234 (2007)
17. Hall, S.B., Baird, R.G., Czarnecki, J.: Engendering flexible social identities as the
basis of organizational resiliency (2016)
18. Hanefeld, J., Mayhew, S., Legido-Quigley, H., Martineau, F., Karanikolos, M.,
Blanchet, K., Liverani, M., Yei Mokuwa, E., McKay, G., Balabanova, D.: Towards
an understanding of resilience: responding to health systems shocks. Health Policy
and Planning 33(3), 355–367 (2018)
19. Harrison, L.A., Gracias, A.J., Friston, K.J., Buckwalter, J.G.: Resilience pheno-
types derived from an active inference account of allostasis. Frontiers in Behavioral
Neuroscience 19, 1524722 (2025)
20. Hohwy, J., Michael, J.: Why should any body have a self? In: The Subject’s Matter:
Self-Consciousness and the Body, chap. 16. Representation and Mind Series, The
MIT Press Cambridge, MA (2017)
21. Horowitz, J.M., England, J.L.: Spontaneous fine-tuning to environment in many-
species chemical reaction networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 114(29), 7565–7570 (2017)
22. Howse, W.: Coping with identity crisis: Group dynamics in response to self-identity
challenges. Studies in Psychological Science 2(1), 28–39 (2024)
23. Ikegami, T., Suzuki, K.: From a homeostatic to a homeodynamic self. BioSystems
91(2), 388–400 (2008)
24. Kachman, T., Owen, J.A., England, J.L.: Self-organized resonance during search
of a diverse chemical space. Physical Review Letters 119(3), 038001 (2017)
25. Kerr, D.J.R., Deane, F.P., Crowe, T.P.: A complexity perspective on narrative iden-
tity reconstruction in mental health recovery. Qualitative Health Research 30(4),
634–649 (2020)
26. Kiefer, A.B.: Psychophysical identity and free energy. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface 17(169), 20200370 (2020)
27. Li, M., Liu, W.: Large deviation principle for multi-scale stochastic systems with
monotone coefficients. Communications in Mathematics and Statistics pp. 1–37
(2024)
28. Maturana, H.R., Varela, F.J.: Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the
living, Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science, vol. 42. Springer
Science & Business Media (2012)
29. Mazzaglia, P., Verbelen, T., C ¸ atal, O., Dhoedt, B.: The free energy principle for
perception and action: A deep learning perspective. Entropy 24(2), 301 (2022)
30. McAdams, D.P.: Narrative identity. In: Handbook of Identity Theory and Research,
pp. 99–115. Springer (2011)
31. Mead, G.H.: The social self. The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific
Methods 10(14), 374–380 (1913)
32. Meichenbaum, D.: Resilience and posttraumatic growth: A constructive narrat-
ive perspective. In: The Evolution of Cognitive Behavior Therapy, pp. 157–171.
Routledge (2017)
14 M Albarracin and D A R Sakthivadivel
33. Miller, M., Albarracin, M., Pitliya, R.J., Kiefer, A., Mago, J., Gorman, C., Friston,
K.J., Ramstead, M.J.: Resilience and active inference. Frontiers in Psychology 13,
1059117 (2022)
34. Mokady, A., Reggev, N.: The role of predictions, their confirmation, and reward in
maintaining the self-concept. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 16, 824085 (2022)
35. Morris, J., Coleman, K.: Fluid identities in multiple cultural practices: How prac-
tice changes becoming teachers’ perceptions of themselves. Journal of Aesthetics
and Creative Education 13(1), 1–14 (2019)
36. Olivieri, E., Vares, M.E.: Large deviations and metastability. No. 100 in Encyclo-
paedia of Mathematics and its Applications, Cambridge University Press (2005)
37. Pachter, J.A., Yang, Y.J., Dill, K.A.: Entropy, irreversibility and inference at the
foundations of statistical physics. Nature Reviews Physics 6(6), 382–393 (2024)
38. Parr, T., Da Costa, L., Friston, K.: Markov blankets, information geometry and
stochastic thermodynamics. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A
378(2164), 20190159 (2020)
39. Perunov, N., Marsland, R.A., England, J.L.: Statistical physics of adaptation.
Physical Review X 6(2), 021036 (2016)
40. Prigogine, I.: Time, structure, and fluctuations. Science 201(4358), 777–785 (1978)
41. Proust, J.: Thinking of oneself as the same. Consciousness and Cognition 12(4),
495–509 (2003)
42. Ramasubramanian, M., Patel, D., Turner, M.R., Ybarra, V.: The influence of life
narrative themes on resilience and life outcomes. Personality and Individual Dif-
ferences 185, 111235 (2022)
43. Ramstead, M., Sakthivadivel, D.A.R., Heins, C., Koudahl, M., Millidge, B.,
Da Costa, L., Klein, B., Friston, K.J.: On Bayesian mechanics: a physics of and by
beliefs. Interface Focus 13(3), 20220029 (2023)
44. Sajid, N., Parr, T., Hope, T.M., Price, C.J., Friston, K.J.: Degeneracy and redund-
ancy in active inference. Cerebral Cortex 30(11), 5750–5766 (2020)
45. Sakthivadivel, D.A.R.: Towards a geometry and analysis for Bayesian mechanics
(2022), preprint arXiv:2204.11900
46. Sakthivadivel, D.A.R.: A worked example of the Bayesian mechanics of classical
objects. In: Active Inference: Third International Workshop. pp. 298–318. Springer
(2022)
47. Seifert, U.: Stochastic thermodynamics, fluctuation theorems and molecular ma-
chines. Reports on Progress in Physics 75(12), 126001 (2012)
48. Seth, A.: Being a beast machine: The origins of selfhood in control-oriented intero-
ceptive inference. In: Andy Clark and His Critics, chap. 17, pp. 238–253. Oxford
University Press (2019)
49. Shih, M., Wilton, L.S., Does, S., Goodale, B.M., Sanchez, D.T.: Multiple racial
identities as sources of psychological resilience. Social and Personality Psychology
Compass 13(6), e12469 (2019)
50. Stets, J.E., Burke, P.J.: A sociological approach to self and identity. Handbook of
Self and Identity 128152(1), 221–9 (2003)
51. Ueltzh¨ offer, K., Da Costa, L., Cialfi, D., Friston, K.: A drive towards thermody-
namic efficiency for dissipative structures in chemical reaction networks. Entropy
23(9), 1115 (2021)
52. Woodward, K.: Concepts of identity and difference. In: A Museum Studies Ap-
proach to Heritage, pp. 429–440. Routledge (2018)