Semantically-Informed Syntactic Machine Translation:
A Tree-Grafting Approach
Kathryn Baker
U.S. Dept. of Defense
Fort Meade, MD 20755
klbake4@tycho.ncsc.mil
Michael Bloodgood
JHU HLTCOE
Baltimore, MD 21218
bloodgood@jhu.edu
Chris Callison-Burch
JHU HLTCOE
Baltimore, MD 21218
ccb@cs.jhu.edu
Bonnie J. Dorr
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
bonnie@umiacs.umd.edu
Nathaniel W. Filardo
JHU HLTCOE
Baltimore, MD 21211
nwf@cs.jhu.edu
Lori Levin
CMU
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
lsl@cs.cmu.edu
Scott Miller
BBN
Cambridge, MA 02138
smiller@bbn.com
Christine Piatko
JHU/APL
Laurel, MD 20723
christine.piatko@jhuapl.edu
Abstract
We describe a uniﬁed and coherent syntac-
tic framework for supporting a semantically-
informed syntactic approach to statistical ma-
chine translation. Semantically enriched syn-
tactic tags assigned to the target-language
training texts improved translation quality.
The resulting system signiﬁcantly outper-
formed a linguistically naive baseline model
(Hiero), and reached the highest scores yet re-
ported on the NIST 2009 Urdu-English trans-
lation task. This ﬁnding supports the hy-
pothesis (posed by many researchers in the
MT community, e.g., in DARPA GALE) that
both syntactic and semantic information are
critical for improving translation quality—and
further demonstrates that large gains can be
achieved for low-resource languages with dif-
ferent word order than English.
1 Introduction
This paper describes a tree-grafting approach to in-
corporating named entities and modality into a uni-
ﬁed and coherent syntactic framework, as a ﬁrst step
toward supporting Semantically-Informed Machine
Translation (SIMT). The implementation of this ap-
proach was the result of a large effort undertaken
in the summer of 2009. The most signiﬁcant re-
sult of the SIMT effort was the integration of se-
mantic knowledge into statistical machine transla-
tion in a uniﬁed and coherent syntactic framework.
By augmenting hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion rules with syntactic labels that were extracted
from a parsed parallel corpus, and further augment-
ing the parse trees with semantic elements such as
named-entity markers and modality (through a pro-
cess we refer to as grafting), we produced a better
model for translating Urdu and English. The result-
ing system signiﬁcantly outperformed the linguisti-
cally naive baseline Hiero model, and reached the
highest scores yet reported on the NIST 2009 Urdu-
English translation task.
We note that, while our largest gains were from
syntactic enrichments to the model, smaller (but sig-
niﬁcant) gains were achieved by injecting semantic
knowledge into the syntactic paradigm. Of course,
entities and modalities are only a small piece of
the much larger semantic space, but demonstrating
success on these new, unexplored semantic aspects
of language bodes well for (larger) improvements
based on the incorporation of other semantic aspects
(e.g., relations and temporal knowledge). Moreover,
we believe this syntactic framework to be well suited
for further exploration of the impact of many dif-
ferent types of semantics on MT quality. Indeed, it
would not have been possible to initiate the current
study without the foundational work that gave rise to
a syntactic paradigm that could support these seman-
tic enrichments. We believe this framework will be
especially useful for exploring other languages with
few resources and different word order than English.
The semantic units that we examined in this ef-
fort were named entities (such as people or organi-
zations) and modalities (indications that a statement
represents something that has taken place or is a be-
lief or an intention). Other semantic units such as
relations between entities and events, were not part
of this effort, but we believe they could be similarly
incorporated into the framework. We chose to exam-
ine semantic units that canonically exhibit two dif-
ferent syntactic types: nominal, in the case of named
entities, and verbal, in the case of modality.
arXiv:1409.7085v1  [cs.CL]  24 Sep 2014
!"
Source Reference pre-SCALE MT output
Nagas Set Fire in Assam 
On Wednesday, angry Naga tribesmen set 10 schools in Manipur on ﬁre.
According to police, hundreds of armed tribesmen of Nagaland set three villages of Gulleki and Sisagar in Assam.
A large number of natives have vacated the area after this attack.
Nagaland claims that Assam state is occupying some of its territory.
While Assam state says that Nagaland has occupied some of its areas.
Nagaland was established as a free state in 1963 which was created by dividing Assamese cities with Naga majority.
Naga tribes started armed struggle for the creation of Nagaland state in 1956.
The separatist Socialist Council of Nagaland has been claiming for a long time that for the creation of ‘Greater Nagaland,’ all the Naga areas of Assam, Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh should be joined with Nagaland.
The Nagaland government claims that thousands of kilometers of its land lies in the Assamese part.
But Assam accused Nagaland for occupying a very large part of its land by force and setting up a second centre of administrative affairs which they call Nevaland.
!" !"# $% &'( )!*% +, -.!/!,
 -0#01* 23 +4 506 78( +, -0'9:!;< !/!, =>?@( AB5 +4 CDE F!GH !I3J4 KH% 5L, 7GE 04
 M9N( +4 O8'#!/!, &'( 3PD>H 74 -BQ18'* RE!S( +4 T'#06  $% &'( -.!/ U'H +4 J/ !N;'* 5BP 71'9/ +4 )!*% +, -0'9:!;<FV3 !"#
 04 -0<WX +, -BD8Y!E 7(!Z( &'( 3PD>H VQE D>E +4 [9\] 2P F^_ !I3J4 7#!`
 J6 -0S` a>E +4 2P )!*% b*!I5 [4 ^_ !HJ4 cV0X3 O8'#!/!, F^_ aE!<
 04 -0<WX a>E +4 2P [4 ^_ !,[4 !4 )!*% b*!I5 [1;d F^_!G45 +# &'( +e;< +86P +, O8'#!/!,
 &'( fg*JH T',P )!'< J6 50h +4 b*!I5 i#P jIP !4 O8'#!/!,  kWlP +#PB bIJm4P 74 -0'9:!;< !/!, +4 )!*% +Nd !GH PB_F!GH !'/ !I!8E +4 J4 nNZ8(04
 UoGp 0* T',P +'# +4 )!'< +4 O8'#!/!, b*!I5 +, =:!;< !/!, F7GH 74 q!XBJY 74 3[d BDd M9N( &'(
 !4 O8'#!/!, r% =N,04 sN9Y0* =8@', n't8H D8N6 7/Du'9X  +'# +4 )!'< +4 !O8'#!/!, JgIJ/" [4 ^_ P_5 [;#!S( +* [vJX !4 -0<WX !/!, )!w +4 KI3J6 =p!,B5P 5BP 506 78( x)!*%F+I_!p !,B_ y!zP +* O8'#!/!,
 Jg'(094 -B5PA_ 74 2P [4 ^_ 7HJ4 cV0X3 b(01] 74 O8'#!/!, F^_ &'( +{|}] +4 )!*% U'(A
 +4 2P J6 5BA +4 b<!h +, O8'#!/!, [4 ^_ )P~#P !4 )!*% U1'#  7(!t?,P04 )!Z( jIP 5BP ^_ !'# +# &'( +e;< 04 +S` ^QE q[EF&I_ +H[4 O8'#P0', _B +Nd ^_ !G45 !8E 7GE ~4J( :!, !4 50(P
Has Imposed a Fire in Assam 
On Wednesday, the tribal mini pur enraged ten schools was also burnt.
According to the police, the number of hundreds of armed tribesmen in the ratio of assam and three set the ﬁre in the village.
After this attack. Local residents in large numbers to the areas.
Claim of assam. That this is the some regions.
While of assam has said that this to some areas of his into custody 
A separate state of on 19 establishment of assam happened in Which the majority of the people of the districts was made.
The state tribes for the establishment of the 19$156 armed declare struggle of the beginning of.
Separatist Council of National organization is the demand for a long time that ‘greater’, for the establishment of the assam, mini pur and all pradesh areas should be included with.
The government of claim thousands of believes that the earth of assam.
But has been accused of assam that the power of this on a large region has taken in the affairs and one Place, vice Center of which he is also
pre-SIMT MT output
Figure 1: An example of Urdu-English translation. Shown are an Urdu source document, a reference translation
produced by a professional human translator, and machine translation output from a phrase-based model (Moses)
without linguistic information, which is representative of state-of-the-art MT quality before the SIMT effort.
Named entities have been the focus of informa-
tion extraction research since the Message Under-
standing Conferences of the 1980s (Grishman and
Sundheim, 1996). Automatic taggers identify se-
mantic types such as person, organization, location,
date, facility, etc. In this research effort we tagged
English documents using an HMM-based tagger de-
rived from Identiﬁnder (Bikel et al., 1999).
Modality is an extra-propositional component of
meaning. In John may go to NY, the basic propo-
sition is John go to NYand the word may indicates
modality. Van der Auwera and Amman (2005) de-
ﬁne core cases of modality: John must go to NY
(epistemic necessity), John might go to NY(epis-
temic possibility), John has to leave now(deontic
necessity) and John may leave now(deontic possi-
bility). Many semanticists (Kratzer, 2009; von Fin-
tel and Iatridou, 2009) deﬁne modality as quantiﬁca-
tion over possible worlds. John might gomeans that
there exist some possible worlds in which John goes.
Another view of modality relates more to a speaker’s
attitude toward a proposition (Nirenburg and Mc-
Shane, 2008; McShane et al., 2004). Modality re-
sources built for this purpose have been described
previously (Baker et al., 2010).
This paper will focus on a tree-grafting mech-
anism used to enrich the machine-translation out-
put and on the resulting improvements to translation
quality when the training process for the machine-
translation systems included tagging of named enti-
ties and modality.
The next section provides the motivation behind
the SIMT approach. Section 3 presents implemen-
tation details of the semantically-informed syntactic
system. Section 4 describes the tree grafting algo-
rithm. Section 5 provides the results of this work.
Standard Hierarchical Rules Syntactic Enhancements Semantically Informed Rules 
Figure 2: The evolution of a semantically informed approach to our synchronous context free grammars (SCFGs).
At the start of summer the decoder used translation rules with a single generic non-terminal symbol, later syntactic
categories were used, and by the end of the summer the translation rules included semantic elements such as named
entities and modalities.
Following this, Section 6 examines work that is re-
lated to our approach. Finally, Section 7 presents
conclusions and future work.
2 Motivation
The aim of the SIMT effort was to provide a general-
ized framework for representing structured semantic
information, such as named entities and modality,
and to investigate whether incorporating this sort of
information into machine translation (MT) systems
could produce better translations. The SIMT effort
differs from other efforts in MT, most notably the
DARPA Global Autonomous Language Exploita-
tion (GALE) initiative, in at least two ways:
1. The SIMT effort worked on translation for a
low-density language, with a minimal amount
of bilingual training data. In GALE, hundreds
of millions of words worth of bilingual texts
are used to train statistical translation models.
In the SIMT effort, only 1.7 million words of
Urdu-English texts were available. Table 1 pro-
vides the data set sizes used in our experiments.
2. The SIMT effort showed signiﬁcant improve-
ments from incorporating syntax and seman-
tics into machine translation, whereas syn-
tactic translation models have not shown
dramatic improvements in GALE’s Arabic-
English translation task. The improvements for
Urdu translation described here are probably
due to the fact that it is a low-resource, verb-
ﬁnal language and so requires generalization
beyond phrase-based or hierarchical phrase-
based models.
These differences created novel research directions
for our effort, and resulted in promising ﬁndings that
suggest that both syntactic and semantic information
are critical for improving translation quality.
It is informative to look at an example transla-
tion to understand the challenges of translating im-
portant semantic entities when working with a low-
resource language pair. Figure 1 shows an example
taken from the 2008 NIST Urdu-English translation
task, and illustrates the translation quality of a state-
of-the-art Urdu-English system (prior to the SIMT
effort). The small amount of training data for this
language pair (see Table 1) results in signiﬁcantly
degraded translation quality compared, e.g., to an
Arabic-English system that has more than 100 times
the amount of training data.
The machine translation output in Figure 1 was
produced using Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), a state-
of-the-art phrase-based machine translation system
that by default does not incorporate any linguistic
information (e.g., syntax or morphology or translit-
Figure 3: Workﬂow for producing semantically-grafted
parse trees. The English side of the parallel corpus is
automatically parsed, and also tagged with modality and
named-entity markers. These tags are then grafted onto
the syntactic parse trees. The relation ﬁnder was designed
for additional tagging but was not implemented in the
current work. (Future work will test relations as another
component of meaning that may contribute toward im-
proved MT ouput.)
eration knowledge). As a result, words that were not
directly observed in the bilingual training data were
untranslatable. Names, in particular, are problem-
atic. For example, the lack of translation for Naga-
land and Nagas induces multiple omissions through-
out the translated text. This is because out of vocab-
ulary words are deleted from the Moses output.
We use modality and named-entity tags as higher-
order symbols inside the translation rules used by
the translation models. Generic symbols in transla-
tion rules (e.g., the non-terminal symbol “X”) were
replaced with structured information at multiple lev-
els of abstraction, using a tree-grafting approach, as
described in more detail in the following sections.
Figure 2 illustrates the evolution of the translation
rules that we used, ﬁrst replacing “X” with grammat-
ical categories and then with semantic categories.
Urdu English
set lines tokens types tokens types
training 202k 1.7M 56k 1.7M 51k
dev 981 21k 4k 19k 4k
devtest 883 22k 4k 19-20k 4k
test 1792 42k 6k 38-41k 5k
Table 1: The size of the various data sets used for the
experiments in this paper including the training, develop-
ment (dev), incremental test set (devtest) and blind test set
(test). The dev/devtest was a split of the NIST08 Urdu-
English test set, and the blind test set was NIST09.
3 Tree-Grafting to reﬁne translation gram-
mars with semantic categories
We use synchronous context free grammars
(SCFGs) as the underlying formalism for our
statistical models of translation. SCFGs provide
a convenient and theoretically grounded way of
incorporating linguistic information into statistical
models of translation, by specifying grammar rules
with syntactic non-terminals in the source and
target languages. We reﬁne the set of non-terminal
symbols so that they not only include syntactic
categories, but also semantic categories.
Chiang (2005) re-popularized the use of SCFGs
for machine translation, with the introduction of his
hierarchical phrase-based machine translation sys-
tem, Hiero. Hiero uses grammars with a single non-
terminal symbol “X” rather than using linguistically
informed non-terminal symbols. When moving to
linguistic grammars, we use the Syntax Augmented
Machine Translation (SAMT) developed by Venu-
gopal et al. (2007). In SAMT the “X” symbols in
translation grammars are replaced with nonterminal
categories derived from parse trees that label the En-
glish side of the Urdu-English parallel corpus. 1 We
reﬁne the syntactic categories by combining them
with semantic categories. This progression is illus-
trated in Figure 2.
We extracted SCFG grammar rules containing
named entities and modality using an extraction pro-
cedure that requires parse trees for one side of the
parallel corpus. While it is assumed that these trees
are labeled and bracketed in a syntactically moti-
vated fashion, the framework places no speciﬁc re-
quirement on the label inventory. We take advan-
tage of this characteristic by providing the rule ex-
traction algorithm with augmented parse trees con-
taining syntactic labels that have named entities and
modalities grafted onto them so that they addition-
ally express semantic information.
Our strategy for producing semantically-grafted
parse trees involves three steps:
1. The English sentences in the parallel training
data are parsed with a syntactic parser. In
our work, we used the lexicalized probabilistic
1For non-constituent phrases, composite CCG-style cate-
gories are used (Steedman, 1999).
Lebanon and the Palestinian Authority  fired  several missiles
NNPGPE
CC JJGPE NNPGPE VBP NNweaponDT JJ
NPGPE NPGPE
NPGPE
NPGPE
NPweapon
VP
S
GPE GPE GPE weapon
Lebanon and the Palestinian Authority  fired  several missiles
NNP CC JJ NNP VBP NNDT JJ
NP NP
NP
NP
NP
VP
S
GPE GPE GPE weapon
Figure 4: A sentence on the English side of the bilingual parallel training corpus is parsed with a syntactic parser, and
also tagged with a named entity tagger. The tags are then grafted onto the syntactic parse tree to form new categories
like NP-GPE and NP-weapon. Grafting happens prior to extracting translation rules, which happens normally except
for the use of the augmented trees.
context free grammar parser provided by Basis
Technology Corporation.
2. The English sentences are named-entity-tagged
by the Phoenix tagger (Richman and Schone,
2008) and modality-tagged by the system de-
scribed in (Baker et al., 2010).
3. The named entities and modalities are grafted
onto the syntactic parse trees using a tree-
grafting procedure. The grafting procedure was
implemented as a part of the SIMT effort. De-
tails are spelled out further in Section 4.
The workﬂow for producing semantically-grafted
trees is illustrated in Figure 3. Figure 4 illustrates
how named-entity tags are grafted onto a parse tree.
We note that while our framework is general, we fo-
cus the discussion here on the particular semantic
elements (named entities and modalities) that were
incorporated during the SIMT effort.
Once the semantically-grafted trees have been
produced for the parallel corpus, the trees are pre-
sented, along with word alignments (produced by an
aligner such as GIZA++), to the rule extraction soft-
ware to extract synchronous grammar rules that are
both syntactically and semantically informed. These
grammar rules are used by the decoder to produce
translations. In our experiments, we used the Joshua
decoder (Li et al., 2009), the SAMT grammar ex-
traction software (Venugopal and Zollmann, 2009),
and special purpose-built tree-grafting software.
Figure 5 shows example semantic rules that are
used by the decoder. The noun-phrase rules are aug-
mented with named entities, and the verb phrase
rules are augmented with modalities. The seman-
tic categories are listed in Table 2 and Table 3. Be-
cause these get marked on the Urdu source as well as
the English translation, semantically enriched gram-
mars also act as very simple named entity or modal-
ity taggers for Urdu. However, only entities and
modalities that occurred in the parallel training cor-
pus are marked in the output.
4 Tree-Grafting Algorithm
The overall scheme of our tree-grafting algorithm is
to match semantic tags to syntactic categories. There
are two inputs to the process. Each is derived from
a common text ﬁle of sentences. The ﬁrst input is
a list of standoff annotations for the semantic units
in the input sentences, indexed by sentence number.
The second is a list of parse trees for the sentences in
Penn Treebank format, indexed by sentence number.
Table 2 lists the entity types identiﬁed during the
SIMT effort, with examples. Table 3 likewise lists
the modality types that were produced by the modal-
ity tagger. Baker et al. (2010) described a system
that automatically tags triggers and targets of modal-
ity. A trigger is a word with a modal meaning like
believe, possible, or want. A target is a word in the
scope of the trigger. For example, the sentence The
students are able to swimis tagged as The students
are ⟨TRIG-ABLE able⟩to ⟨TARG-ABLE to swim⟩.
The tree-grafting algorithm proceeds as follows.
For each sentence, we iterate over the list of seman-
tic tags. For each semantic tag, we determine the
Figure 5: Example translation rules with named entity
tags and modalities combined with syntactic categories.
parent node or nodes in the corresponding syntactic
parse tree that dominate the word sequence covered
by the tag. The following tests are then applied:
•If the semantic and syntactic units correspond
exactly, graft the name of the semantic tag onto
the highest corresponding syntactic constituent
in the tree. For example, in Figure 4, the NNP
“Lebanon” receives a GPE (geo-political en-
tity) tag at the NP constituent level.
•For the case of named entities: If the seman-
tic tag corresponds to words that are adjacent
daughters in a syntactic constituent, but less
than the full constituent, insert an NP node
dominating those words into the parse tree, as
a daughter of the original syntactic constituent.
The name of the semantic tag is grafted onto the
new NP node. This is a case of rule splitting.
•If a syntactic constituent selected for grafting
has already been labeled with a semantic tag,
Named Entity Example
AGE 50 years old
DATE September 26, 2009
FACILITY Southwestern Medical Center
GPE (Geo-political entity) New York
GPE-ite Australian
LOCATION West Sea
MONEY 15,000 pounds
OCCUPATION governor
ORGANIZATION United Nations
ORGANIZATION-ite marines
PERCENT 3.1 percent
PERSON Tony Blair
TIME 2030 GMT
Table 2: Named entity tags
Require NOTPermit
Permit NOTRequire
Succeed NOTSucceed
SucceedNegation NOTSucceedNegation
Effort NOTEffort
EffortNegation NOTEffortNegation
Intend NOTIntend
IntendNegation NOTIntendNegation
Able NOTAble
AbleNegation NOTAbleNegation
Want NOTWant
Belief NOTBelief
Firm Belief NOTFirm Belief
Negation
Table 3: Modality tags with their negated versions
overlay that tag.
•If the words covered by the semantic tag fall
across two syntactic constituents, do nothing.
This is a case of crossing brackets.
Our tree-grafting procedure was simpliﬁed to ac-
cept a single semantic tag per syntactic tree node
as the ﬁnal result. The algorithm keeps the last tag
seen as the tag of precedence. In practice, we estab-
lished a precedence ordering for modality tags over
named entity tags by grafting named entity tags ﬁrst
and modalities second. Our intuition was that, in
case of a tie, ﬁner-grained verbal categories would
be more helpful to parsing than ﬁner-grained nomi-
nal categories.2 In case a word was tagged both as
2In testing we found that grafting named entities ﬁrst and
modalities last yielded a slightly higher Bleu score than the re-
verse order.
Baselines Syntax Semantics Other
Berkeley 
& 5-gram}
18.0
21.0
24.0
27.0
30.0
Hiero w/Berkeley & trigram LM
Hiero w/Giza  & trigram
Moses w/ Giza & 5-gram
Hiero w/Berkeley & 5-gram
Syntax (3 FFs)
Syntax (8 FFs)
Syntax (12 FFs)
Syntax + NEs         
Syntax + Modality
Sytanx + NEs & Modality 
+ multiple alignments
+ min Bayes risk
+ strip UNKs
!"#$!%#&!%#'!(#)!(#%!(#(!(#*
!$#$
+"#$
!'#+
!!#'
!$#)!$#)
Baselines Syntax Semantics Other
Berkeley 
& 5-gram}
18.0
21.0
24.0
27.0
30.0
Hiero w/Berkeley & trigram LM
Hiero w/Giza  & trigram
Moses w/ Giza & 5-gram
Hiero w/Berkeley & 5-gram
Syntax (3 FFs)
Syntax (8 FFs)
Syntax (12 FFs)
Syntax + NEs         
Syntax + Modality
Sytanx + NEs & Modality 
+ multiple alignments
+ min Bayes risk
+ strip UNKs
!"#$!%#&!%#'!(#)!(#%!(#(!(#*
!$#$
+"#$
!'#+
!!#'
!$#)!$#)
Figure 6: Results for a range of experiments conducted
during the SIMT effort. Results show scores for base-
line systems, which here include a phrase-based model
(Moses) and a hierarchical phrase-based model (Hiero),
neither of which make use of syntactic information.
These also show the substantial improvements when syn-
tax is introduced, along with different numbers of feature
functions (FFs), and further improvements from semantic
elements. The scores are lowercased Bleu calculated on
the held-out devtest set.
a modality target and a modality trigger, we gave
precedence to the target tag. This is because, while
modality targets vary, modality triggers are gener-
ally identiﬁable with lexical items. Finally, we used
a simpliﬁed speciﬁcity ordering of modality tags,
borrowing from an approach described in (Baker et
al., 2010), to ensure precedence of more speciﬁc tags
over more general ones. Table 3 lists the modal-
ity types from highest (Require modality) to lowest
(Negation modality) precedence.3
5 Results
Figure 6 gives the results for a number of experi-
ments conducted during the SIMT effort. 4 The ex-
3Future work could include exploring additional methods of
resolving tag conﬂicts or combining tag types on single nodes,
e.g. by inserting multiple intermediate nodes (effectively using
unary rewrite rules) or by stringing tag names together.
4These experiments were conducted on the devtest set, con-
taining 883 Urdu sentences (21,623 Urdu words) and four refer-
ence translations per sentence. The Bleu score for these exper-
iments is measured on uncased output, which in general should
be higher, but the devtest effectively had only three reference
translations. This explains why the scores are lower than the
periments are broken into three groups: baselines,
syntax, and semantics. To contextualize our results
we experimented with a number of different base-
lines that were composed from two different ap-
proaches to statistical machine translation—phrase-
based and hierarchical phrase-based SMT—along
with different combinations of language model sizes
and word aligners. Our best performing baseline
was a Hiero model with a 5-gram language model
and word alignments produced using the Berkeley
aligner. The Bleu score for this baseline on the de-
velopment set was 23.1 Bleu points.
After experimenting with syntactically motivated
grammar rules, we conducted three experiments on
the effects of incorporating semantic elements (e.g.,
named entities and modality markers) into the trans-
lation grammars. In our devtest set our taggers
tagged on average 3.5 named entities (NEs) per
sentence and 0.35 modalities per sentence. These
were included by grafting NEs and modality mark-
ers onto the parse trees. Individually, each of these
made modest improvements over the syntactically-
informed system alone. Grafting named entities
onto the parse trees improved the Bleu score by 0.2
points. Modalities improved it by 0.3 points. Doing
both simultaneously had an additive effect and re-
sulted in a 0.5 Bleu score improvement over syntax
alone. This improvement was the largest improve-
ment that we got from anything other than the move
from linguistically naive models to syntactically in-
formed models.
Figure 7 shows example output from the ﬁnal
SIMT system. Notice that even in the title of the
article, the SIMT system produces much more co-
herent English output than that of the linguistically
naive system. The ﬁgure also shows improvements
due to transliteration, which are described in Irvine
et al. (2010). The scores reported in Figure 6 do not
include transliteration improvements.
6 Related Work
This section describes related work in monolingual
techniques for augmenting parsing, where parsing is
applied to one language in the parallel text.
Our tree-grafting approach is related to a tech-
nique used for tree augmentation in (Miller et al.,
2000), where parse-tree nodes are augmented with
scores on the NIST 2009 test set.
semantic categories. Miller et al. augment tree nodes
with named entities and relations, while we used
named entities and modalities. The parser is sub-
sequently retrained for both semantic and syntac-
tic processing. The semantic annotations were done
manually by students following a set of guidelines
and then merged with the syntactic trees automati-
cally. In our work we tagged our corpus with en-
tities and modalities automatically and then grafted
them onto the syntactic trees automatically, for the
purpose of training a statistical machine translation
system. An added beneﬁt of the extracted trans-
lation rules is that they are capable of producing
semantically-tagged Urdu parses, despite that the
training data were processed by only an English
parser and tagger.
Related work in syntax-based MT in-
cludes (Huang and Knight, 2006), where a
series of syntax rules are applied to a source
language string to produce a target language phrase
structure tree. The Penn English Treebank (Marcus
et al., 1993) is used as the source for the syntactic
labels and syntax trees are relabeled to improve
translation quality. In this work, node-internal and
node-external information is used to relabel nodes,
similar to earlier work where structural context was
used to relabel nodes in the parsing domain (Klein
and Manning, 2003). Klein and Manning’s methods
include lexicalizing determiners and percent mark-
ers, making more ﬁne-grained VP categories, and
marking the properties of sister nodes on nodes.
All of these labels are derivable from the trees
themselves and not from an auxiliary source.
In the parsing domain, the work of (Petrov and
Klein, 2007) is related to the current work. Petrov
and Klein use a technique of rule splitting and rule
merging in order to reﬁne parse trees during machine
learning. Hierarchical splitting leads to the creation
of learned categories that have linguistic relevance,
such as a breakdown of a determiner category into
two subcategories of determiners by number, i.e.,
this and that group together as do some and these.
We use rule splitting in cases where a semantic cat-
egory is inserted as a node in a parse tree, after the
English side of the corpus has been parsed by a sta-
tistical parser (as described in section 4).
7 Conclusions and Future Work
We have described a technique for translation that
shows particular promise for low-resource lan-
guages. We have integrated linguistic knowledge
into statistical machine translation in a uniﬁed and
coherent framework. We demonstrated that aug-
menting hierarchical phrase-based translation rules
with semantic labels (through “grafting”) resulted in
a 0.5 Bleu score improvement over syntax alone.
Although our largest gains were from syntactic
enrichments to the Hiero model, demonstrating suc-
cess on the integration of new semantic aspects of
language bodes well for future improvements based
on the incorporation of other semantic aspects, e.g.,
relations and temporal knowledge, into the transla-
tion rules, would further improve the translations.
The syntactic framework is unique in its ability to
support the exploration of the impact of many dif-
ferent types of semantics on MT quality.
Our ﬁndings indicate that the use of syntactic and
semantic information radically improves translation
quality for low-resource languages with different
word order than English. Urdu has SOV (subject,
object, verb) word order compared to English SVO
(subject, verb, object). Thus, our observed improve-
ments are likely to be transferable to languages like
Korean and Farsi, as well as a host of other low-
resource languages with different word order.
The work presented here represents the ﬁrst small
steps toward a full integration of MT and seman-
tics. Efforts underway in DARPA’s GALE program
have already demonstrated the potential for combin-
ing MT and semantics (termed distillation) to an-
swer the information needs of monolingual speak-
ers using multilingual sources. In previous work,
however, semantic processing proceeded largely in-
dependently of the MT system, operating only on
the translated output. Our approach is signiﬁcantly
different in that it combines syntax, semantics, and
MT into a single model, offering the potential advan-
tages of joint modeling and joint decision-making.
It would be interesting to explore whether the inte-
gration of MT with syntax and semantics can be ex-
tended to provide a single-model solution for tasks
such as cross-language information extraction and
question answering, and to evaluate our integrated
approach, e.g., using GALE distillation metrics.
Acknowledgments
We thank Aaron Phillips for help converting the out-
put of the entity tagger for ingest by the tree-grafting
program. We also thank Basis Technology Corpora-
tion for their generous contribution of software com-
ponents to this work. This work is supported, in part,
by the Johns Hopkins Human Language Technol-
ogy Center of Excellence, by the National Science
Foundation under grant IIS-0713448, and by BBN
Technologies under GALE DARPA/IPTO Contract
No. HR0011-06-C-0022. Any opinions, ﬁndings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not nec-
essarily reﬂect the views of the sponsor.
References
Johan Van Der Auwera and Andreas Ammann. 2005.
Overlap between situational and epistemic modal
marking. In Martin Haspelmath, Matthew S. Dryer,
David Gil, and Bernard Comrie, editors, World Atlas
of Language Structures, chapter 76, pages 310–313.
Oxford University Press.
Kathryn Baker, Michael Bloodgood, Bonnie J. Dorr,
Nathaniel W. Filardo, Lori Levin, and Chrisitine Pi-
atko. 2010. A modality lexicon and its use in au-
tomatic tagging. In 7th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Malta,
May. Language Resources and Evaluation Conference.
Daniel M. Bikel, Richard Schwartz, and Ralph M.
Weischedel. 1999. An algorithm that learns what’s
in a name. Mach. Learn., 34(1-3):211–231.
David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based model
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL-2005), Ann Arbor, Michi-
gan.
Ralph Grishman and Beth Sundheim. 1996. Mes-
sage Understanding Conference-6: A brief history. In
COLING, pages 466–471.
Bryant Huang and Kevin Knight. 2006. Relabeling syn-
tax trees to improve syntax-based machine translation
quality. In HLT-NAACL, New York.
Ann Irvine, Mike Kayser, Zhifei Li, Wren Thornton, and
Chris Callison-Burch. 2010. Integrating output from
specialized modules in machine translation: Translit-
eration in Joshua. The Prague Bulletin of Mathemati-
cal Linguistics, 93:107–116.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 423–430.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL-2007 Demo and Poster Sessions.
Angelika Kratzer. 2009. Plenary address at the annual
meeting of the Linguistic Society of America.
Zhifei Li, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Dyer, Sanjeev
Khudanpur, Lane Schwartz, Wren Thornton, Jonathan
Weese, and Omar Zaidan. 2009. Joshua: An open
source toolkit for parsing-based machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 135–139, Athens, Greece,
March. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beat-
rice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: the Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.
Marjorie McShane, Sergei Nirenburg, and Ron
Zacharsky. 2004. Mood and modality: Out of
the theory and into the fray. Natural Language
Engineering, 19(1):57–89.
Scott Miller, Heidi J. Fox, Lance A. Ramshaw, and
Ralph M. Weischedel. 2000. A novel use of statistical
parsing to extract information from text. In Proceed-
ings of Applied Natural Language Processing and the
North American Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Nirenburg and McShane. 2008. The formulation of
modalities (speaker attitude) in OntoSem.
Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Learning and infer-
ence for hierarchically split PCFGs. In AAAI 2007
(Nectar Track).
Alexander E. Richman and Patrick Schone. 2008.
Mining wiki resources for multilingual named entity
recognition. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages
1–9, Columbus, Ohio, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Mark Steedman. 1999. Alternating quantiﬁer scope in
CCG. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
College Park, Maryland.
Ashish Venugopal and Andreas Zollmann. 2009. Gram-
mar based statistical MT on Hadoop: An end-to-end
toolkit for large scale PSCFG based MT. Prague Bul-
letin of Mathematical Linguistics, 91.
Ashish Venugopal, Andreas Zollmann, and Stephan V o-
gel. 2007. An efﬁcient two-pass approach to
synchronous-CFG driven statistical MT. In Pro-
ceedings of the Human Language Technology Con-
ference of the North American chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (HLT/NAACL-
2007), Rochester, New York.
Kai von Fintel and Sabine Iatridou. 2009. Morphology,
syntax, and semantics of modals. Lecture notes for
2009 LSA Institute class.
!"
The First Nuclear Test Was in 1990.
Thomas red of the United States, the National 
Laboratory in designer are already working on 
the book of Los Alamos National Laboratory, 
former director of the technical intelligence, with 
the cooperation of Diana steelman wrote.
This book under the title of the spread of nuclear 
expressway: the political history of the bomb and 
this has been written and the two writers have 
claimed that the country also has made nuclear 
bomb or any other country, Korea nuclear 
secrets, or any of the other nuclear power 
cooperation.
Thomas Reid said in an interview to the news 
that Benazir Bhutto in 1990 in the era of China 
The first nuclear bomb test.
Thomas Reid said that on the basis of several 
reasons to believe that China has the first 
nuclear bomb test.
reasons of this bomb design and China 
information obtained during the conversation 
with the scientists.
He further said that this was the reason that 
Pakistan only two weeks in 1998 and was able 
to nuclear experiment in response to India's 
nuclear experience within three days.
Thomas Reid had reminded that Russia has 
sudden nuclear experiment in 61 and in 
response to the United States to experiment in 
17 days. despite the fact that the United States 
had quite a long period from the bomb.
He further said that the experience of the atom 
bomb Pakistan in May 1998, he was to make 
very carefully and confidence on Pakistani 
scientists.
Thomas red when was this question that China 
has provided to Pakistan nuclear technology, he 
said in response to China, Pakistan and India as 
a common enemy.
He said that there is evidence that Dr. Abdul 
Qadeer Khan has also used the Chinese design 
after did the documents from Libya in were also 
confirmed to them.
On a question whether the joint nuclear tests is 
common, he said in Hanoi in the United States In 
the Nevada desert open detainees for Britain's 
nuclear experiment.
He said that it also that Israel should also 
provide access to the results of this experience.
Thomas red with this question was whether 
China's program of nuclear proliferation.
Thomas red said that in the Iranian city of China 
with 491 in Spain, the raw material for nuclear 
installation instructions and provides.
In addition to this, China has also provided the 
enrichment plant in Cairo.
He said that China would provide nuclear 
technology to North Korea, Iran, Syria, Pakistan, 
Egypt, Libya and Yemen.
pre-SIMT SIMT Reference
'first nuclear experiment in 1990 was'
Thomas red Unilever National Laboratory of the 
United States in !"#$ designer, are already 
working on the book of Los %$&'#( National 
Laboratory #!#!, former director of the technical 
%!)'#"!( written with the cooperation of 
!#&'"%.
This book 'nuclear express: political history and 
the expansion of bomb' has been written, and 
the two writers have also claimed that the 
country has made nuclear bomb is he or any 
other country's nuclear secrets to # #(*+ or that 
of any other nuclear power cooperation is 
achieved.
 Thomas Reid said in a news %#($#
interview that in 1990 in the era of Benazir 
Bhutto China had the experience of Pakistan's 
first nuclear bomb.
Thomas red said that on the basis of many 
reasons he was sure that China had the 
experience of Pakistan's first nuclear bomb.
reasons in the bomb design and the China 
scientists mentioned During the conversation 
with Information.
He further said that this was the reason that only 
two weeks in Pakistan in 1998 and within three 
days in response to India's nuclear experience to 
nuclear experiment was able to.
Thomas red reminded that in 61 in Russia has 
suddenly nuclear experience and was in 
response to the United States were to 
experience began 17 days in despite the fact 
that the United States had the bomb from a long 
period.
He further said that the nuclear bomb in 1998 
that Pakistan may experience of what was he 
was made from very carefully and confidence 
was to meet on the Pakistani scientists.
Thomas was red when this question that China 
has provided the nuclear technology to Pakistan, 
In response, He said as China and India was 
joint enemy of Pakistan.
He said that it is also present proof of that Dr. 
Abdul Qadeer Khan after the Chinese design. 
apart from this, The # ##, obtained documents 
in Libya were is also confirmed it from them.
To another question whether the joint nuclear 
tests is common, He said in #$!$% in the US 
Open in the desert of (!#($! servants for Britain's 
nuclear experiment.
He said that we are guesses also believed that 
Israel should also provide access to the results 
of the this experience.
Thomas Reid and this question was also is 
China's program of nuclear proliferation.
On this Thomas Reid said that in 1991 to set up 
in China !($-%( city of Iran nuclear installation 
instructions for the raw material, and !# #(.# ! 
is provided.
Besides this, China has provided of enrichment 
plant in Iran )*#/ also.
He said that China, North Korea, Iran, Syria, 
Pakistan, through Egypt, Libya and Yemen is to 
provide nuclear technology.
"First Nuclear Experiment conducted in 
1990"
Thomas Reed, who has worked as a weapon 
designer in Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory of America, has written this book in 
collaboration with Danny Stillman,the former 
Director of Technical Intelligence of Los Alamos 
National Laboratory.
This book has been written with the title 'Nuclear 
Express:A Political History of the Bomb And its 
Proliferation,' and in this both the authors have 
claimed that any country that has made an 
atomic bomb has either stolen the nuclear 
secrets of another country or has had 
cooperation with some other nuclear power.
Thomas Reed said in an interview to US News 
that in 1990, in the era of Benazir Bhutto, China 
had conducted the experiment of Pakistan's first 
nuclear bomb.
Thomas Reed said that he is convinced on the 
basis of several reasons that China has 
conducted the experiment of Pakistan's first 
nuclear bomb.
Those reasons include the design of the bomb 
and information obtained while talking to the 
scientists of China.
He further said that this was the reason why in 
1998, Pakistan was able to conduct a nuclear 
experiment just in two weeks and three days in 
response to India's nuclear experiment.
Thomas Reed also reminded that in 1961 Russia 
suddenly carried out a nuclear experiment and it 
took 17 days for America to do the experiment in 
response to this, although America already had 
this bomb for awhile.
He further said that the atom bomb, whose 
experiment was done in 1998 by Pakistan, was 
developed with extreme care and Pakistani 
scientists had full confidence in it.
When Thomas Reed was asked if China had 
provided the nuclear technology to Pakistan, he 
replied that India was a common enemy of China 
and Pakistan.
He said that the proof to this also exists in that 
Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan used the Chinese 
design, and, apart from this, the documents 
retrieved from Libya afterwards also proved this.
To another question as to whether it is usual to 
carry out nuclear experiments with others, he 
said that in 1990 America openly conducted a 
nuclear experiment for Britain in the desert of 
Nevada.
He said that we may also presume that Israel, 
too, was given access to the results of this 
experiment.
Thomas Reed was also asked whether China's 
nuclear proliferation program is active.
On this, Thomas Reid said that since 1991, 
China has been providing raw material, 
instructions, and designs for the nuclear 
structure situated in Ispahan, a city in Iran.
Besides this, China has also provided an 
enrichment plant to Iran in Karaj.
He said that China has been providing nuclear 
technology to Iran, Syria, Pakistan, Egypt, Libya, 
and Yemen through North Korea.
Figure 7: An example of the improvements to Urdu-English translation before and after the SIMT effort. Output is
from the baseline Hiero model, which does not use linguistic information, and from the ﬁnal model, which incorporates
syntactic and semantic information.