VU Research Portal
Internal outset
Boonstra, Evert Alexander
2023
DOI (link to publisher)
10.5463/thesis.64
document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication in VU Research Portal
citation for published version (APA)
Boonstra, E. A. (2023). Internal outset: Exploring empirical and philosophical implications of the free-energy
principle. [PhD-Thesis - Research and graduation internal, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam]. s.n.
https://doi.org/10.5463/thesis.64
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
E-mail address:
vuresearchportal.ub@vu.nl
Download date: 12. Dec. 2025
Outset
Internal
Exploring empirical and philosophical
implications of the free-energy principle
Evert Boonstra
Internal
outset
Evert
Boonstra
Internal outset
Exploring empirical and philosophical implications of the
free-energy principle
Colophon
Printing: Proefschriften.nl, Ede
Layout and design: Birgit Vredenburg, persoonlijkproefschrift.nl
Copyright 2023 © Evert Boonstra
The Netherlands. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Cover picture
Claudia Gschwend Cover picture
https://unsplash.com/photos/7afqJT5evIs ClauCdioav eGrs pcihcwtuerned
https://unsplash.com/phColtaousd/i7a aGfqscJhTw5eenvdIs
https://unsplash.com/photos/7afqJT5evIs
Funding Funding
Funding
All work presented in this dissertation was All w A o l r l k w p o r r e k s p e r n e t s e e d n te in d t in h i t s h i d s i d ss is e s r e t r a ta ti t o io n n w w a a s s s s u u p p p p o o rt r e t d ed
supported by the European Research Council
by tbhye tEheu rEouproepaena nR Reseesaearcrchh CCoouunncciill((EERRCC) )
StarStitanrgtinGgrGanrat n(tE (RERCC-2-2001155--SSTTGG--667799339999))
(ERC) Starting Grant (ERC-2015-STG-679399) awaarwdaerdd etdo tporporfo.fd.dr.r.HHeelleeeenn AA.. SSlalaggtetrer
awarded to prof. dr. Heleen A. Slagter
2
2
VRIJE UNIVERSITEIT
VRIJE UNIVERSITEIT
Internal outset: explorIng empIrIcal and phIlosophIcal ImplIcatIons of the free-
energy pr IncIple
INTERNAL OUTSET: EXPLORING EMPIRICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL
ACADEMISCH PROEFSCHRIFT
IMPLICATIONS OF THE FREE-ENERGY PRINCIPLE
ter verkrijging van de graad Doctor aan
de Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
op gezag van de rector magnificus
prof.dr. J.J.G. Geurts,
in het openbaar te verdedigen
ten overstaan van d e promotiecommissie
van de FacuAltCeAit DdeErM GIeSdCraHg sP-R eOn EBFeSwCegHiRngIFswT etenschappen
op woensdag 22 ma art 2023 om 13.45 uur
teirn v eeerknr bijigjeinegn kvoamn sdte v garna adde Dunoicvtoerr saitaeni t,
de Vrije UDnei vBeoreslietelaita An m11s0t5erdam,
op gezag van de rector magnificus
prof.dr. J.J.G. Geurts,
door
in het openbaar te verdedigen
ten overstaan van de promotiecommissie
Evert Alexander Boonstra
van de Faculteit der Gedrags- en Bewegingswetenschappen
op woensdag 22 maart 2023 om 13.45 uur
in een bijeegnekboomresnt vtea nA ldkem uanaivrersiteit,
De Boelelaan 1105
door
Evert Alexander Boonstra
geboren te Alkmaar
3
promotoren: prof.dr. H.A. Slagter
prof.dr. C.N.L. Olivers
promotiecommissie: prof.dr. J.B.J. Smeets
prof.dr. B.U. Forstmann
prof.dr. F.P. de Lange
prof.dr. C. Press
dr. J.D. Kiverstein
dr. F. van Opstal
Table of contents
Chapter 1: General introduction 9
1.1. Minimal free-energy minimization 10
1.2. Philosophical implications 13
1.3. Action in perception and belief updating 16
1.4. Conscious perception 16
Chapter 2: Conscious perception and the modulatory role of dopamine: 19
no effect of the dopamine D2 agonist cabergoline on visual masking,
the attentional blink, and probabilistic discrimination
2.1. Abstract 20
2.2. Introduction 21
2.3. Methods 24
2.4. Results 36
2.5. Discussion 45
Chapter 3: Conscious perception and the role of the basal ganglia: 51
preliminary findings from a deep brain stimulation study
3.1. Abstract 52
3.2. Introduction 53
3.3. Methods 56
3.4. Results 60
3.5. Discussion 66
Chapter 4: The dialectics of free energy minimization 71
4.1. Abstract 72
4.2. Introduction 73
4.3. Habitual anticipation, plasticity, dialectics 76
4.4. States of anticipation 88
4.5. From tension to contradiction 97
4.6. Discussion 106
Chapter 5: Learning to predict based on self- versus externally 109
induced prediction violations: a direct comparison using a Bayesian
inference modelling approach
5.1. Abstract 110
5.2. Introduction 111
5.3. Methods 113
5.4. Results 120
5.5. Discussion 127
Chapter 6: Summary and general discussion 133
Chapter 7: Nederlandse samenvatting 141
Authorship specifications 148
Dankwoord / Acknowledgements 150
References 152
Chapter 1
General introduction
Chapter 1
Over the past decade or so, the notion that everything that the brain does can
be explained by one and the same principle has gained scientific interest and
traction. This notion goes by many names, such as predictive processing and
active inference, but our name of choice here will be the free-energy principle
(FEP) (Friston, 2005, 2010, 2019).
On the one hand the FEP has been called tautological, a truism, unfalsifiable,
and vacuous. Not only by its critics, but in the first place by its inventor and
primary advocate Karl Friston. On the other hand, it has been heralded as a
paradigm shift for the field of cognitive neuroscience and psychology. What
is this principle and why is it important for the study of brain and behavior?
1.1. Minimal free-energy minimization
Much has been written about the FEP’s math and technical details (see Andrews,
2021; Friston, 2010, 2019; Gershman, 2019). What follows will be about the FEP’s
basic idea instead of math and technicalities to get to the core of its novelty,
which provides background to each of the chapters comprising this dissertation.
Boundary
The FEP takes up the question posed by the physicist Erwin Schrödinger: ‘How
can the events in space and time which take place within the spatial boundary
of a living organism be accounted for by physics and chemistry?’ (Schrodinger,
2012: 3, italics in original; Friston, 2013). A spatial boundary is the FEP’s
departure point for thinking about biological systems generally and the brain in
particular. This boundary instantiates a separation between a system’s internal
organization and its outside world, or simply between internal and external
states. When we speak of a system’s “state”, we mean simply its coordinates
in the space of possible states, with different axes for different variables
(Friston, 2018). The FEP takes the the existence of a boundary as its starting
point, because if this separation between internal and external states could
not be made in spatial terms, there would be no system (no living organism)
to speak of or to do research on in the first place. The boundary states that
make up the separation between internal and external states in turn consist of
sensory states and action states. The relationship between these four types of
states (internal, action, external, sensory) render internal states conditionally
independent from external states (Friston, 2019), to the point that together they
instantiate a feedback loop. For example, say I uphold the (internal) belief that I
control the mouse cursor on my computer screen, and I act on this belief, then
my internal states affect action states to move the mouse, which in turn affect
10
General introduction
external states (the mouse and mouse cursor) that translate back to my sensory
states in the form of perceived movement, which would bolster my belief in the
control I exert, assuming all goes well.
Attracting set
Now the FEP not only describes a delineation of states, but it formalizes how the
system’s overall set of states changes over time. Specifically, the FEP formalizes
how biological systems maintain their physical integrity by revisiting a small 1
number of characteristic, phenotypic states (Badcock et al., 2019). This is
important, because out of all possible configurations a system can take up, only
a relatively small number of states can support the continuation of its existence
(Wiese & Metzinger, 2017). This limited number of states is formalized as an
attracting set of states to which an organism tends to return by minimizing free
energy (Friston et al., 2020). For example, most organisms have a narrow range
of bodily temperatures allowing for continued existence (~32-42 °C for humans).
Free energy here refers to variational free-energy, which is an information
theoretic quantity that bounds or limits the entropy of an organism’s sensory
states (Friston, 2010). In this context, entropy is a measure of information
capturing the long-term average of surprise: a statistical measure of the
probability of sensory samples sampled by an agent (Badcock et al., 2019). This
means that an organism minimizes variational free-energy by ensuring that it
limits the range of states it occupies, thereby increasing its chance of survival.
If a system’s state at any given point in time refers to its coordinates in
state space, then the change of a system’s states over time is the groove it carves
through this space of possible states, which involves repeatedly revisiting a
small number of states, as in the case of daily routines:
‘You are you because you revisit (the neighborhood of) these attracting
states time after time. Your life traces out a path on this delicately
structured attracting set or manifold, where your highly convoluted
orbits—or strange loops—keep bringing you back to where you once came
from’ (Friston, 2018: 3)
Bayesian inference
What makes the FEP such an encompassing framework is that the minimization
of free energy or surprise is not only a way for a system to constrain its states to
viable bounds, but it is equivalent to the negative logarithm of Bayesian model
evidence, which means that the minimization of free energy is equivalent to the
optimization of Bayesian model evidence (Friston, 2010). The model in question
11
Chapter 1
coincides with an organism’s internal states, a generative model of the (hidden)
causes of sensory samples the agent is confronted with, which are encoded by
nervous system dynamics, such as neural activity and connection strengths
(Badcock et al., 2019). It is important to emphasize that we are not dealing
with a brain or nervous system which also harbors a model of the causes of its
sensations; the idea is that nervous systems instantiate generative models: a
biological system is a model of its world (Friston, 2010). Said differently, the
internal states discussed so far can be cast as encoding Bayesian belief about
the state of the (external) world (see Pouget et al., 2013 for possible neural
implementations). It is through the equivalence of (sensory) surprise and
(Bayesian) negative model evidence that the minimization of free-energy can be
cast as the minimization of prediction error; the minimization of the difference
between prior beliefs and bottom-up sensory input (Clark, 2013; Hohwy, 2013).
To minimize this difference, biological systems tend towards the most likely
percept given available sensory data, but they also have the option to change
this data through action in line with their current model. Both perception and
action are obvious candidates for free-energy minimization at the periphery,
but there are more. The brain as a generative model attempts to optimize itself
both offline by dreaming (Hobson et al., 2014; Hobson & Friston, 2014, 2016), as
well as online by simulating possible courses of action that are not necessarily
executed (Seth, 2014, 2015). These are all merely different ways of achieving the
same thing: the minimization of free energy or the optimization of the system’s
generative model given its history and surroundings.
In sum
We can summarize the FEP’s basic idea as three central tenets:
1. A boundary between internal states and external states
2. An imperative to revisit a limited set of characteristic states
3. The equivalence of this imperative to Bayesian inference
Taken together, the FEP provides us with an encompassing framework from
where to think of biological systems and the brain including the imperative to
survive (by occupying characteristic states) on the one hand, and probabilistic
inference on the other. With regards to the human brain in particular, perhaps
the quickest way to get at the novelty of the FEP is to take the example of
hallucinations, where prior beliefs predominate over and above new information
(Corlett et al., 2019; Friston et al., 2014). While we usually (and justifiably) ask in
what way hallucinations are a departure from normality, with the FEP we get to
12
General introduction
turn this question around by asking: what does the possibility of hallucinatory
states imply for normal brain function? The answer from the FEP’s perspective
is that every percept is to a degree a matter of hallucinating at the world. A
constitutive boundary between internal belief and outside world inscribes
the possibility of false inference in general, and of full-blown hallucination
in the case of the human brain, into the very starting point of our approach to
understanding the brain.
1
1.2. Philosophical implications
In contrast to the traditional approach to studying brain and behavior, the FEP’s
basic idea is nothing less than an alternative overarching theory of biological
systems. Scientifically, whether the FEP’s view will come to supplant the
traditional one will depend on its perspective giving rise to research programs
better able at explaining brain function through rigorous experimentation and
computational modelling. Only time will tell.
There is however more to say about a theoretical revision of how we understand
human brain function. Unlike other fields of science, our understanding of the
human brain not only relates to how we think about ourselves and the way
we relate to the world outside ourselves, but it also relates to how we think
about thinking. Insofar as cognitive neuroscience is a field of research reliant
on the thought and brains of individual scientists, insofar as brains are organs
performing Bayesian inference, and insofar as Bayesian inference operates
based on priors, it seems reasonable to ask: what are our priors as cognitive
neuroscientists? Based on what priors does our field of research operate?
Not that this question is new. It is essentially the question posed by Immanuel
Kant in his famous three critiques published between 1781 and 1790, but tailored
to cognitive neuroscience. For Kant, the problem of philosophy is the observing
subject’s possibility of knowing, insofar as knowing itself presupposes a
faculty or structure that makes knowledge possible. If the aim of science is to
gain knowledge, the aim of (Kantian) philosophy is to work out what makes
knowledge possible. With Kant, philosophy is no longer dealing directly with
the way reality is in itself, but it is restricted to the way reality appears to us
through the categories of our understanding. The implication is that philosophy
deals only with phenomena, not with the way things are in themselves. This
structure that structures phenomena is what Kant called “the transcendental”.
In this shift, Kant turned philosophical reflection onto itself, and it is because of
13
Chapter 1
this reflexive gesture that it is not enough to assert the results from empirical
science as a solution to this problem. This is what Helmholtz did. Even
though he was deeply appreciative of Kant, Helmholtz asserted the primacy
of ‘physiological investigations on sense perception’ over and above Kantian
philosophy (Helmholtz, 1995: 364). However, the problem formulated by Kant
is not a lack of (scientific) knowledge, but the possibility and the categories of
knowing itself. The insistence on continued experimentation falls short in this
case, because the problem is the faculty that grounds the orientation from
which we conduct experiments: ‘For the principles in accordance with which we
set up experiments must themselves always be derived from the knowledge of
nature, hence from theory.’ (Kant, 2000: 6, first introduction). Said differently,
our experiments too presuppose a theoretical position to depart from, and it is
this position that Kant questions.
This does not mean a regression to obscurantist anti-science. Empirical
science keeps all of its importance, and we definitely need more ‘physiological
investigations on sense perception’, but Kant’s point is that even empirical
science does not provide us with direct access to reality. If it did, the history of
science would not be riddled with detours, trial and error, dead ends, extended
periods of little progress, alternated with unsettling leaps forward. Empirical
science is without a doubt the privileged way to gain knowledge about the
external world, but the results from our experiments are themselves caught in a
loop presupposing some understanding of how our object under study functions
to start out from, leaving Kant’s problem intact. Instead of resigning ourselves
to the easy division between “bad” subjective influences and “good” objective
experimental results, the challenge becomes to show, and where needed to
criticize and to change, how the inclusion of subjectivity – our theoretical
position – is constitutive for the objects we attempt to know as “objective”
reality. We place “objective” between quotation marks not because there is no
such thing as objective reality distinct from human subjectivity, but because
our access to “objective” reality is subjectively mediated by our theoretical
orientation, as well as technological apparatuses in our experiments. Therefore
the philosophical background of our field is not just of interest for historical
and philosophical reasons, but it is a matter of understanding what traditions
our field of research is beholden to, so that we may more easily revise or even
depart from these traditions if they no longer serve us.
If we turn back to cognitive neuroscience and the FEP, the question becomes:
what is the traditional view? If we accept the FEP as a possible paradigm shift,
what are we shifting away from? It is beyond the scope of this introduction
14
General introduction
to investigate the entire philosophical backdrop of our field (cf. Bennett &
Hacker, 2022), but we can pinpoint some points of convergence relevant for
the present thesis. One common criticism leveraged against the traditional
study of perception is the tendency in our experiments to bombard participants
repeatedly and passively with arbitrary stimuli. This practice makes complete
sense if we subscribe to a view of brain function from which primacy is afforded
to external influences over and above internal states. This is the view of
British empiricism. Take for instance John Locke’s An Essay Concerning Human 1
Understanding from 1690:
“A man begins to have ideas when he first has sensation. […] If it shall
be demanded then, WHEN a man BEGINS to have any ideas, I think
the true answer is,—WHEN HE FIRST HAS ANY SENSATION. For, since
there appear not to be any ideas in the mind before the senses have
conveyed any in, I conceive that ideas in the understanding are coeval
with SENSATION; WHICH IS SUCH AN IMPRESSION OR MOTION MADE
IN SOME PART OF THE BODY, AS MAKES IT BE TAKEN NOTICE OF IN THE
UNDERSTANDING.” (Locke, 1796, Book II, Chapter I, §23)
In the paragraph immediately following Locke concludes: “Thus the first
capacity of human intellect is,—that the mind is fitted to receive the impressions
made on it”. A couple centuries later and our experimental practices to study the
brain are still beholden to these coordinates. It is this view the FEP breaks with
by not only affording primacy to expectations encoded by internal states, on
which external “impressions” impinge, but also by asserting the importance of
an organism’s capacity to elicit its own sensations through the detour of acting
on external states. We find similar importance afforded to this fundamental
loop in the work of Hegel, a major successor of Kant. Chapter 4 explores how
the FEP links up with alternative historical and philosophical traditions from
Kant to Hegel.
In the remainder of this general introduction, we will explore two possible ways
to deploy a departure from the empiricist perspective in the subfields revolving
around the role of action in perception (§1.3) and conscious perception (§1.4).
15
Chapter 1
1.3. Action in perception and belief updating
In his 2019 book The Brain from Inside Out, neuroscientist Georgi Buszáki takes
issue precisely with the way this empiricist tradition predominates in present-
day neuroscience and psychiatry (Buzsáki, 2019):
“In the empiricism-inspired model, signals enter the brain from the
outside, neuronal circuits process and perceive them, and some part of
the brain decides whether or not to generate a motor response. The main
emphasis is on perceptual processing and association, which are believed
to be the main drivers of the brain’s ability to comprehend and represent
the outside world.” (p. 8)
Buzsaki’s core argument is that instead, “the brain is a self-organized system
with preexisting connectivity and dynamics whose main job is to generate
actions and to examine and predict the consequences of those actions.” (p. xiii).
This view is entirely in line with the FEP (cf. Friston & Buzsáki, 2016): the shift
towards an emphasis on internally maintained and acted on Bayesian models
is in essence an inside-out perspective already.
Instead of perception in isolation, action gains particular importance from
this perspective because it is the main way for an organism to put its models
to the test; to check whether they are still up-to-date, and to change them
where necessary. Chapter 5 is a preliminary attempt at contrasting an inside-
out perspective with the traditional outside-in perspective by contrasting
conditions in which the prediction of stimuli was either self-generated through
action or externally induced by sensory cue, to see how prediction violation and
belief-updating differ within the context of a Bayesian model derived from the
FEP.
1.4. Conscious perception
Most of conscious perception research has converged on a cortex-centered
approach, epitomized in the title of an article by Boly and colleagues from 2017:
“Are the neural correlates of consciousness in the front or in the back of the
cerebral cortex?”. To pose the problem of consciousness in these terms excludes
a role for the rest of the brain. The FEP comes with a revaluation of internal
states in contrast to the traditional focus on external influences. When we speak
of internal states in terms of an organism’s generative model, it is important
to emphasize that we speak of the entire brain, not just the cortex. The FEP
16
General introduction
ascribes particular importance to the basal ganglia (BG) and its irrigation by
dopamine for active inference (FitzGerald et al., 2015; Friston et al., 2014; Friston
et al., 2012). Friston (2018) has postulated that any organism that engages in the
minimization of expected surprise over a sufficiently large timescale, i.e., in
selecting between models that predict that what has not yet happened (i.e., as
in active inference), exhibits (self-)consciousness.
The structures comprising the BG are well-suited to be investigated for this
model-selection purpose, because they not only form a central hub in circuits 1
spanning from brainstem to cortex, but they have long been known to play a
role in sensory and perceptual processes (Afrasiabi et al., 2021; Alexander &
Crutcher, 1990; Arsalidou et al., 2013; L. L. Brown et al., 1997; Seger, 2013). Indeed,
selection has been hypothesized to be the BG’s main function (Redgrave et al.,
1999, 2011) The idea is then that striatal dopamine influences the contents of
conscious perception by determining which ‘internal model’ or interpretation
of the current sensory state dominates perceptual experience, in anticipation
of what is to come. Chapters 2 and 3 comprise two attempts at including
subcortical structures into the study of conscious perception.
17
Chapter 2
Conscious perception and the modulatory role of
dopamine: no effect of the dopamine D2 agonist
cabergoline on visual masking, the attentional
blink, and probabilistic discrimination
Published as:
Boonstra, E. A., van Schouwenburg, M. R., Seth, A. K., Bauer, M., Zantvoord, J.
B., Kemper, E. M., Lansink, C. S., & Slagter, H. A. (2020). Conscious perception
and the modulatory role of dopamine: No effect of the dopamine D2 agonist
cabergoline on visual masking, the attentional blink, and probabilistic
discrimination. Psychopharmacology, 237(9), 2855–2872. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00213-020-05579-9
Chapter 2
2.1. Abstract
Rationale. Conscious perception is thought to depend on global amplification
of sensory input. In recent years, striatal dopamine has been proposed to be
involved in gating information and conscious access, due to its modulatory
influence on thalamocortical connectivity.
Objectives. Since much of the evidence that implicates striatal dopamine is
correlational, we conducted a double-blind crossover pharmacological study
in which we administered cabergoline – a dopamine D2 agonist – and placebo
to 30 healthy participants. Under both conditions, we subjected participants to
several well-established experimental conscious-perception paradigms, such
as backward masking and the attentional blink task.
Results. We found no evidence in support of an effect of cabergoline on conscious
perception: key behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) findings associated
with each of these tasks were unaffected by cabergoline.
Conclusions. Our results cast doubt on a causal role for dopamine in visual
perception. It remains an open possibility that dopamine has causal effects in
other tasks, perhaps where perceptual uncertainty is more prominent.
20
Conscious perception and dopamine
2.2. Introduction
The relationship between consciousness and the brain is often lauded as one
of the big mysteries in contemporary science. How does the brain constrain its
own spontaneous activity as well as the influences it undergoes from outside, in
the determination of conscious awareness? Several influential theories propose
that consciousness is related to the ‘broadcasting’ of sensory information to the
whole brain and that thalamocortical circuits serve as an important mediator
of such broadcasting (Crick & Koch, 2003; Dehaene & Changeux, 2011; Edelman,
2003). The broadcasting of sensory information necessitates the occurrence of 2
selection or filtering, simply because not everything which takes place in the
brain reaches conscious awareness.
With the requirement of selection, we cannot ignore the role of the basal
ganglia: a cluster of subcortical nuclei located deep in the brain, which modulate
activity of thalamocortical circuits (Smith, Raju, Pare, & Sidibe, 2004) and have
long been implicated in action selection; the decision to execute one of several
possible behaviors (Redgrave, Prescott, & Gurney, 1999). Notably, the basal
ganglia are connected through parallel loops via the thalamus not only to the
motor cortex, but to many parts of frontal cortex as well (Alexander, DeLong,
& Strick, 1986). Hence, it is capable of modulating a wide range of cognitive
operations. Indeed, the basal ganglia have been implicated in working memory
updating (Frank & O’Reilly, 2006), attention shifting (Cools, 2011), and visual
categorization (Seger, 2008): cognitive acts that support suggestions concerning
the common principle underlying the basal ganglia’s operations; namely,
selection (Frank, Loughry, & O’Reilly, 2001; Redgrave, Prescott, & Gurney, 1999).
The striatum – the biggest structure constituting the basal ganglia –
deserves special attention on this topic. As the basal ganglia’s primary input
nucleus, the striatum is well-positioned to play a pivotal role in the basal
ganglia’s selective functionalities, as terminal fields from different cortical
regions converge in the striatum (Yeterian & van Hoesen, 1978; Haber, Kim,
Mailly, & Calzavara, 2006; Mailly, Aliane, Groenewegen, Haber, & Deniau, 2013;
Heilbronner, Meyer, Choi, & Haber, 2018). While dopaminergic projections
are usually associated with reward prediction error (Schultz, 2016), and the
role of reward in perceptual decision making (Ding & Gold, 2013); less well-
studied signaling of the (dopamine-infused) striatum include saliency, threat,
processing of sensory information, and promoting of behaviors reliant on
sensory information (Cox & Witten, 2019).
Despite the suggestion that the basal ganglia may be “mute” as regards to
consciousness (Boly et al., 2017), it has been known for a long time that basal
21
Chapter 2
ganglia structures are involved in sensory and perceptual processes (Alexander
& Crutcher, 1990; Arsalidou, Duerden, & Taylor, 2013; L. L. Brown, Schneider,
& Lidsky, 1997; Seger, 2013). Both the striatum and dopaminergic firing have
been implicated in the tight relationship between perception and action, and
consciousness more generally. For example, dopamine-depleted mice are
unable to attend to salient sensory information and choose appropriate actions,
suggestive of a critical role for dopamine in the expression of consciousness
(Palmiter, 2011). In humans as well, it has recently been shown that minimally
conscious patients suffer from a dopaminergic deficit in presynaptic neurons
projecting to the striatum and central thalamus (Fridman, Osborne, Mozley,
Victor, & Schiff, 2019).
In humans, the striatum and its irrigation by dopamine have also been
implicated in well-known experimental paradigms used to study the neural
correlates of consciousness, such as the attentional blink and backward
masking task. In the attentional blink task, a deficit occurs when people have
to detect two target stimuli (T1 and T2) presented in close temporal succession
among distracter events. Specifically, when T2 follows T1 within 100–500 ms,
it often goes unnoticed. This deficit is called the attentional blink (AB; Shapiro,
Raymond, & Arnell, 1997). Healthy participants with more D2-like receptor
binding in the striatum – as shown with PET – showcased a larger AB (Slagter
et al., 2012). In addition, intracranial EEG recordings in the ventral striatum
revealed a short-latency increase in theta-band oscillatory activity only for
consciously perceived target stimuli (Slagter et al., 2017).
In backward masking tasks, processing of target stimuli is interrupted by
presenting a mask in close succession to the target (Breitmeyer, 2007). Studies
employing fMRI consistently show differences in BOLD activity in the striatum
and thalamus between seen and unseen stimuli using backward masking tasks
(Bisenius, Trapp, Neumann, & Schroeter, 2015). In another PET study, dopamine
D2 binding potential in the right striatum was found to correlate positively
with both objective (task performance) and subjective (seen/unseen) visibility
during backward masking (Van Opstal et al., 2014). These studies collectively
suggest a role for the striatum and dopaminergic activity in the selection of
visual information and the formation of conscious visual percepts.
However, up until now the relationship between striatal dopamine and
conscious perception is based on correlational evidence. As such, in the
present study we sought to manipulate this relationship experimentally, by
administering the dopamine D2 agonist cabergoline to healthy participants.
Out of the two main dopamine receptor families, D2 receptors have been
found to be more prevalent in the striatum, while D1 receptors are present
22
Conscious perception and dopamine
more in the prefrontal cortex (Gerfen, 1992). We chose cabergoline because
it has greater affinity for D2 receptors, and it has been reported to have less
side-effects compared to other D2 agonists such as bromocriptine (Frank &
O’Reilly, 2006). Cabergoline, at low doses, has been suggested to preferentially
stimulate pre-synaptic D2 autoreceptors, which have been found to inhibit
phasic dopamine bursts in the striatum (Ford, 2014; Frank & O’Reilly, 2006).
Cabergoline has been successfully administered in small dosages (1-1.5 mg)
to manipulate performance in healthy participants on working memory tasks
(Broadway, Frank, & Cavanagh, 2018; Fallon, Zokaei, Norbury, Manohar, &
Husain, 2017; Frank & O’Reilly, 2006), a modified version of the Simon task 2
(Cavanagh, Masters, Bath, & Frank, 2014), as well as action cancellation and
error awareness tasks (Nandam et al., 2013). When cabergoline was administered
to Parkinson’s patients for longer periods of time, decreases contrast sensitivity
was found (Hutton, Morris, & Elias, 1999). We administered cabergoline in an
attempt to manipulate performance on two paradigms traditionally used to
study the neural correlates of conscious perception: backward masking and the
attentional blink task. In addition, there is increasing evidence that dopamine
plays a crucial role in determining the influence of sensory information in
relation to expectations acquired through past experience (Cassidy et al., 2018;
Friston et al., 2012). To investigate this relationship, we subjected participants
to a probabilistic discrimination task in which the probability of stimulus
occurrence varied across blocks of trials, thereby tapping into the learning
capabilities the basal ganglia is implicated in traditionally (Berke, 2018).
The difficulty with manipulating dopamine is that effects have been found
to depend on baseline dopamine levels in accordance with an inverted-U-shape
(Cools & D’Esposito, 2011). This means that dopamine is thought to have an
optimal level for task performance, but that dopamine manipulations may
either benefit or worsen performance dependent on an individual’s starting
point on the U-curve. Two measures used to estimate baseline dopamine levels
are working memory operation span (OSPAN; Broadway et al., 2018; Cools, Gibbs,
Miyakawa, Jagust, & D’Esposito, 2008) and spontaneous eye-blink rate (sEBR;
Cavanagh et al., 2014; Jongkees & Colzato, 2016). We used these measures to
analyze and control for potentially different effects of cabergoline in relation
to baseline dopamine levels.
23
Chapter 2
2.3. Methods
Participants
30 native Dutch-speakers were recruited from the University of Amsterdam
subject pool to complete the experiment (mean age = 22, range 18-29, 25
female). Because our study is the first to investigate the effects of cabergoline
on conscious perception, we did not conduct a power analysis. Instead, our
sample size is on the upper end of sample sizes employed by previous research
in which cognitive and neural effects of cabergoline were reported with 12-30
participants (Cavanagh et al., 2014; Cohen, Krohn‐Grimberghe, Elger, & Weber,
2007; Frank & O’Reilly, 2006; Nandam et al., 2013; Norbury, Manohar, Rogers, &
Husain, 2013; Yousif et al., 2016; Fallon et al., 2017; Broadway et al., 2018), and in
which the behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) effects were reported
which we aimed to manipulate with cabergoline (12-15 subjects; Del Cul et al.,
2007; van Opstal et al., 2014; Slagter et al., 2012).
Four participants experienced adverse reactions during the cabergoline
session (dizziness and nausea) that interfered with their ability to participate in
the study. In two participants, nausea was present to the point of vomiting. One
participant dropped out due to headaches in the placebo session. Completers and
non-completers did not differ in baseline age, BMI, heart rate/blood pressure,
or baseline dopamine proxies (see below). It should be noted however that all
drop-outs were women.
In total, 124 individuals were considered for inclusion in the study. 113
were interviewed over the telephone to ensure normal or corrected-to-
normal vision, no history of neurological, psychiatric, or any other relevant
medical problems, and abstinence from psychoactive medication. The use of
hormonal contraceptives served as an additional inclusion criterium for female
participants, who were tested outside of their period due to variability in D2R
availability during different phases of the menstrual cycle (Czoty et al., 2009).
63 individuals were eligible for participation, out of which 35 participants were
available to schedule the required three lab visits (see Procedure). 5 participants
did not meet requirements for inclusion based on the first lab visit. After
excluding 5 participants with adverse reactions, the final sample consisted
of 25 participants (mean age = 22, range 18-29, 20 female). In exchange for
their participation, participants received 10 euros an hour, with a minimum
of 110 euros in total. The study protocol was approved by the medical ethical
committee of the Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam (currently Amsterdam
University Medical Centers). All participants provided written informed consent
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
24
Conscious perception and dopamine
Procedure
Participants came to the lab three times on different days (see Table 1). Once for
screening (duration: 2.5h), and twice for an experimental session in which either
placebo or 1.5mg of cabergoline was administered orally (duration: 4.5h each),
as part of a double-blind crossover design. Previous studies found cognitive and
neural effects of cabergoline using a dosage of 1-1.5mg (Cavanagh et al., 2014;
Cohen et al., 2007; Frank & O’Reilly, 2006; Nandam et al., 2013; Norbury et al.,
2013; Yousif et al., 2016; Fallon et al., 2017; Broadway et al., 2018). As with our
sample size, we chose a dosage of 1.5mg to be on the upper end of previously
employed dosages. There was at least a day in between screening and the first 2
session, and at least a week between both sessions.
Screening. The first lab visit took place anywhere between 09:00 and 17:30.
After providing written informed consent, participants answered a series of
questions concerning potential medical conditions. Next, we conducted the
M.I.N.I.; a structured screening interview for DSM-IV axis-I disorders (Sheehan
et al., 1998). We subsequently measured participant’s weight, height, BMI, blood
pressure (BP), and heart rate. Participants were included in the experiment only
if these measures fell within pre-established bounds (BMI 18-30, diastolic BP <
50 or > 90 mmHg, systolic BP < 95 or > 140 mmHg). Next, six external electrodes
were attached to the participant’s face and ears in order to measure spontaneous
eye-blink rate (sEBR) at rest. Finally, participants completed an operation span
(OSPAN) working-memory task (Unsworth, Heitz, Schrock, & Engle, 2005),
and a titration procedure for two behavioral tasks to be completed during both
experimental sessions (backward masking and probabilistic discrimination;
see below).
Session. All placebo and cabergoline sessions (the second and third
visit) took place between 08:30 and 14:00. Participants were instructed to
abstain from drug and heavy alcohol use, the day before and during the day
of the session. Also, participants were instructed to abstain from caffeine
and nicotine the morning of the session. Compliance to the instructions was
checked by the examiner on arrival, in case of non-compliance the session
was postponed. Female participants completed a midstream pregnancy test.
Breakfast was offered, in order to avoid cabergoline-intake on an empty
stomach. Blood pressure and heart-rate were measured using an Omron® M3
comfort Sphygmomanometer, and participants filled in a visual analogue scale
(VAS, see below) three times during the session: on arrival, at around 1.5h after
placebo or cabergoline intake, and at the end of the session. After the initial
blood pressure/heart-rate/VAS measurement, participants were administered
either placebo or cabergoline in a double-blind fashion (order randomized
25
Chapter 2
across participants). After a 40-minute break, a BioSemi ActiveTwo system
(BioSemi Inc., Amsterdam, The Netherlands) EEG cap and electrodes were fitted.
Drug plasma levels have been found to reach maximum concentration after
approximately 1.5-3h (Persiani, Rocchetti, Pacciarini, Holt, Toon, & Strolin‐
Benedetti, 1996; Agúndez, Garcia-Martin, Alonso-Navarro, & Jiménez-Jiménez,
2013). Approximately 1 hour and 20 minutes after drug intake, participants
completed 6 minutes of sEBR recordings, followed by the backward masking
task around 1.5h after drug intake (see below), during which EEG was recorded.
After this task, the EEG setup was removed from the participant’s head. After a
30-minute lunch, participants proceeded to the attentional blink task, a simple
reaction time task, and the probabilistic discrimination task (see below). At the
end of the experiment, one final blood pressure/heart rate and VAS measure was
undertaken. At the end of the final session, participants were asked to indicate
in which session they believed they had received cabergoline.
Table 1. Experimental procedures for the screening, placebo, and cabergoline sessions.
Screening Sessions (placebo/cabergoline)
Medical questionnaire Questions regarding recent substance use +
pregnancy test
M.I.N.I. Blood pressure/heart rate + VAS 1
Body weight/height Drug intake
Blood pressure/heart rate 40-minute break
sEBR EEG setup
OSPAN sEBR
Titration backward Blood pressure/heart rate + VAS 2
masking
Titration probabilistic Backward masking (± 1.5h after drug intake)
discrimination
30-minute lunch
Attentional blink
Reaction time task
Probabilistic discrimination
Blood pressure/heart rate + VAS 3 (± 3.5h after drug
intake)
26
Conscious perception and dopamine
Physiological and subjective state measures
Heart rate and blood pressure. Physiological measurements were taken
once during screening, and three times during both sessions; namely, on
arrival, at around 1.5h after drug intake, and on completion of testing (± 3.5h
after drug intake) (see Table 1). These measurements were obtained using an
Omron® M3 comfort Sphygmomanometer.
Subjective self-report. A set of sixteen VAS measures were used (Bond
& Lader, 1974), to assess the subjective state of the subject before medication
intake, at around 1.5h after drug intake, and on completion of testing (± 3.5h
after drug intake). Each scale consisted of a 100-mm horizontal line, anchored 2
by contrasting states of mind (e.g., happy versus sad). Subjects were asked
to regard each line as a continuum and to rate their feelings at the time by
moving a vertical slider across each line. The scales could then be scored by
measuring the length in millimeters from the positive end of each line to the
subject’s marked location. These sixteen VAS measures were summarized as
three categories: contentedness, calmness, and alertness (Bond & Lader, 1974).
Baseline dopamine proxies. Both sEBR and OSPAN are widely-used
measures that have been related to baseline dopamine levels (Cools &
D’Esposito, 2011; Jongkees & Colzato, 2016). Both measures have been used in
combination with cabergoline in order to account for individual differences in
baseline dopamine (Broadway et al., 2018; Cavanagh et al., 2014). Eye blink rate
is defined as the number of spontaneous eye blinks per minute. The measure has
high test-retest reliability (Kruis, Slagter, Bachhuber, Davidson, & Lutz, 2016)
and is an often-used biomarker of baseline dopamine D2 receptor functioning
(Jongkees & Colzato, 2016; Karson, 1983; Taylor et al., 1999, but see Sescousse et
al., 2018). Subjects were asked to look at a central fixation cross on a computer
screen in a relaxed state for 6 minutes while we measured eye activity from
a set of vertical and horizontal electrodes, in order to detect eye blinks. This
procedure was employed during all three lab visits.
Eye blinks were established in two ways. First, through a fully automatic
procedure implemented in the python module MNE (create_eog_epochs;
Gramfort et al., 2013). Second, eye-blinks were established through a custom
semi-automatic procedure using EEGLAB for MATLAB (Delorme & Makeig,
2004). If mean sEBR per minute differed more than 3 blinks between both
methods, the semi-automatic procedure was repeated, and an average was
taken of both semi-automatic attempts as the final value. Prior to any repetition
of the semi-automatic method, correlations between the automatic and semi-
automatic method exceeded .95 for measurements during all three lab visits.
27
Chapter 2
OSPAN is a working-memory task with high test-retest reliability
(Unsworth et al., 2005), in which participants are instructed to remember
letters, while solving simple arithmetic problems in between letter presentation
(Unsworth et al., 2005). Sets of 3-7 letters were presented successively at
fixation. The OSPAN score was calculated through partial credit scoring, so
that each correctly recalled letter in the appropriate location was counted as
correct, regardless of whether the entire sequence was recalled correctly or not.
Scores could range from zero to 75. OSPAN was measured only during screening.
Reaction time. To assess the effects of cabergoline on alertness we
administered a 40-trial simple reaction time (RT) task (Brown et al., 2016). In
this task, participants had to respond as quickly as possible by pressing the
spacebar whenever a white circle (subtending approximately 3.1° of visual angle)
appeared at the center of the computer screen against a black background.
Stimulus onset asynchrony was jittered between 500 and 1250 ms, with a mean
of 1000 ms. This task lasted less than 2 minutes.
Main experimental paradigms
All stimuli were presented on an ASUS VG236H 23-inch LCD screen (refresh
rate = 100 Hz, resolution 1920x1080). Participants viewed the screen at a distance
of 80 cm.
Figure 1. Experimental procedure for one trial of the backward masking task (adapted from Van
Opstal et al., 2014)
Backward masking. In the backward masking task, adapted from Van
Opstal et al. (2014), participants had to indicate whether briefly presented
masked digits (1, 4, 6, or 9) were smaller or larger than 5 and rate the confidence
in their response (Figure 1). Each trial started with the presentation of a central
fixation cross (30 point Courier New), which increased in size (106 point Courier
28
Conscious perception and dopamine
New, 150 ms duration), cueing the impending target. The target stimulus (30
point Courier New) then appeared for 10 ms at one of two positions centered at
the vertical midline (top or bottom, 2.29° from fixation). Both stimulus locations
were equally probable. A mask followed the target (200 ms duration) at a variable
stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA). Due to the employed refresh rate of 100Hz,
the SOA could vary from 10 ms to 100 ms in 10 ms steps. By making the delay
between cue and target dependent on SOA, the delay between cue and mask was
held constant at 800 ms. The mask (30 point Courier New) was composed of two
letters “E” and two letters “M”, tightly surrounding the target location without
superimposing or touching it. All stimuli were black and presented on a white 2
background, using the Psychophysics toolbox for MATLAB (Brainard, 1997). The
central fixation cross was visible throughout the experiment.
Participants were instructed to indicate by button press whether the
presented digit was smaller or larger than 5, while simultaneously indicating
the confidence in their response (sure/unsure); resulting in four possible
responses (<5 sure, <5 unsure, >5 unsure, >5 sure). In previous research it was
found that the D2 agonist pergolide affected response confidence (Lou et al.,
2011). Responses were given by means of a response box attached to the arm
rests of the participant’s chair. Response buttons were counterbalanced across
participants, who were instructed to guess one of two “unsure” buttons if they
did not see the target.
If the participant’s reaction time exceeded 1 second, a message was
presented indicating that their response was too slow for the duration of 1
second, urging a faster response. An individual threshold for awareness was
established during the screening session (see above), by fitting a logistic
model (threshold defined as SOA corresponding to 75% accuracy; mean
threshold = 52.93 ms, min = 31 ms, max = 89 ms, sd = 14.38; Del Cul, Dehaene,
& Leboyer, 2006; Van Opstal et al., 2014). This model was fitted on the basis of
176 trials during screening, where each of 11 SOA durations (from 0-100 ms)
was presented 16 times.
Prior to the experiment, participants first completed a practice block (176
trials in screening, 88 trials during placebo and cabergoline sessions). In both
drug sessions, participants completed 920 trials in total, split by seven possible
SOAs between target and mask: 200 mask-only trials (0 ms SOA), 200 trials each
for the main SOAs (10 ms / awareness threshold / 100 ms), 40 trials surrounding
the threshold (threshold minus 10 ms and threshold plus 10 ms), and 40 trials
with a 70 ms SOA. The trials in between individual thresholds and 100 ms were
excluded from analysis (threshold + 10ms and 70 ms), because some participants
arrived at an individual threshold at or above 70 ms. This meant that trials with
29
Chapter 2
a SOA at threshold + 10 ms and 70 ms would fall below or above participant’s
individual threshold, depending on the participant. 80 trials per participant
were discarded for this reason, leaving 840 trials.
Figure 2. Experimental procedure for one trial of the attentional blink task (adapted from Slagter
et al., 2017)
Attentional blink. Participants also performed a standard AB task in
which they had to identify two digits (T1 and T2) presented in a rapid stream of
centrally presented distractors (letters and symbols; adapted from Slagter et al.,
2012; Slagter et al., 2017; see Figure 2). T2 followed T1 either in the time window
of the AB, after 200 ms (short-interval trial), or outside the time window of the
AB, after 800 ms (long-interval trial). Each trial started with a central fixation
cross (1500 ms), after which the stimulus stream began, consisting of 22 stimuli.
Stimuli were presented on a black background (RGB 70, 70, 70) at the center of
the screen (28 point Arial; 0.85° visual angle) for 50 ms, followed by a 50 ms
blank. Digits were drawn randomly (without replacement) from the set 2–9.
Distractors were randomly drawn (without replacement) from the following
set of 30 letters and symbols: W, E, R, T, Y, U, P, A, D, F, G, H, J, K, L, Z, X, C, V, B,
N, M, @, #, $, %, }, &, <, and =. Participants were asked to indicate sequentially
the identity of the targets they saw, using the numpad on a standard keyboard.
If they missed a target, they were instructed to guess. Stimulus presentation
was performed using Presentation (Neurobehavioural Systems).
In both sessions, participants first completed a short practice block (20
trials), in which the first 8 trials moved at half speed. Next, participants moved
on to the main experiment (222 trials), spread over 6 blocks consisting of 37
trials each.
Probabilistic discrimination. In the probabilistic discrimination task,
adapted from Bauer et al. (2016, September), participants were presented
30
Conscious perception and dopamine
continually with a central fixation cross (28 point Arial, RGB 0, 0, 0), on top
of which an image (6.68° visual angle) of either a face or house was presented
for 120 ms, against a grey background (RGB 128, 128, 128). Face stimuli were
created on the basis of the Park Aging Mind Laboratory, University of Texas at
Dallas (Minear & Park, 2004), while house stimuli were based on the Caltech
University Computational Vision database (http://vision.caltech.edu/archive.
html). On each trial, participants had to report the category of the image with by
pressing “Q” or “P” on a standard keyboard. Responses were counterbalanced
across participants, who were instructed to emphasize accuracy over and
above speed. The maximum response interval was 1700 ms, after which the 2
next stimulus was presented regardless of whether a response was given. The
inter-trial interval was jittered and varied from 800 to 1200 ms.
The difficulty of stimulus discrimination was manipulated in terms of
stimulus coherence (Figure 3). Stimuli from the above-mentioned databases
were cropped to the outlines of faces and houses and a 2-dimensional spatial
Fourier transform (on luminance values for x-/y-coordinates) was calculated.
The amplitude (power-) spectra of all 82 face and house images were averaged
and subsequently applied to all individual images, such that all images (faces
and houses of all coherence levels) had an identical power spectrum. In other
words, none of them differed in global contrast or luminance. The phase-spectra
of each individual image (that therefore provided all pictorial information) was
retained and was subsequently superimposed with various levels of (uniform)
random noise for each image (Bauer et al., 2016, September). To account for bias
in the circular phase-distribution of superimposed noise and signal phase-
spectra, noise-spectra were sampled following previous suggestions (Dakin,
Hess, Ledgeway, & Achtman, 2002).
Titration consisted of two subsequent procedures, in order to establish three
difficulty levels for each individual participant. First, participants completed
300 trials, spread over 10 staircase blocks, in order to establish difficulty levels
corresponding to an accuracy of 75% for each stimulus category separately.
During this 3-up-1-down staircase procedure, participants received a green
thumbs-up (RGB R [56 154 79], border RGB [17 79 22]) or red thumbs-down (RGB
[83 2 5], border RGB [251 84 84]) at the center of the screen as feedback after each
trial (500 ms duration).
31
Chapter 2
Figure 3. Probabilistic discrimination stimuli (adapted from Bauer et al., 2016, September)
Next, a total of 810 trials followed, across 27 blocks, in order to extrapolate
the acquired difficulty level to three difficulty levels. For the second part of
the titration procedure, participants received feedback in the break in between
blocks; in order to counteract the development of a bias for one of two response
categories. Difficulty levels were estimated using the method of constant
stimuli (MOCS; Bauer et al., 2016, September). The psychometric functions
obtained through this procedure were used to estimate difficulty (coherence)
levels corresponding to 70, 82, and 95% accuracy.
In both the placebo and cabergoline session, the same three difficulty
levels were employed that were acquired from the titration procedure during
screening. Unbeknownst to participants, the prior probability of each category
was manipulated in a block-wise manner (20/35/50/65/80%), spread over
25 blocks of 40 trials each, for a total of 1000 trials per session. As such, we
manipulated perceptual information (difficulty) and stimulus prior probability
independently of one another. Stimulus presentation for the titration procedure
during the screening was performed using the Psychophysics toolbox for
MATLAB (Brainard, 1997), and Presentation was used to present the task in
both experimental sessions (Neurobehavioural Systems).
Behavioral analyses
Physiological and subjective state measures. In order to test whether
physiology and subjective state changed over the course of the experiment,
and whether these measures were influenced by cabergoline, we conducted a
repeated-measures analysis-of-variance (RM ANOVA) for heart rate, diastolic
and systolic blood pressure, and each VAS category separately; across all three
time-points and both sessions. We conducted a paired-samples t-test between
32
Conscious perception and dopamine
sessions for our simple RT task, as an additional measure to assess alertness.
In order to test whether cabergoline exerted influence on sEBR, we conducted
a paired-samples t-test between sEBR under placebo versus cabergoline.
Kendall’s Tau correlation was employed to establish the relationship between
sEBR sessions, as well as the relationship between sEBR and OSPAN, as this
coefficient is more robust in the case of small samples and tied ranks (Bonett &
Wright, 2000). Correlations were Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons.
Backward masking. The dependent measures in the backward masking
task were accuracy (0/1) and confidence (unsure/sure). For both of these
measures, we computed a 2 (Drug; placebo/cabergoline) x 5 (SOA; mask- 2
only/10 ms/threshold – 10 ms/threshold/100 ms) RM ANOVA. Furthermore,
we performed an additional analysis including screening sEBR and OSPAN as
covariates in both of these analyses, as we predicted cabergoline effects may
depend on individual baseline dopamine levels, based on previous reports
(Broadway et al., 2018; Cavanagh et al., 2014; Cools & D’Esposito, 2011; Jongkees
& Colzato, 2016). We repeated these analyses for the two-alternative forced
choice version of the signal detection theory parameters d’ (Green & Swets,
1966) and meta-d’ (Maniscalco & Lau, 2012), for the three primary SOAs (10 ms,
threshold, and 100 ms).
One participant confused the confidence response buttons in one session.
We reversed these confidence scores manually. One participant experienced side
effects only near the end of the last session. This participant thus completed the
backward masking task twice without knowledge about drug condition. In order
to maximize statistical power, this participant was included in all analyses
concerning the backward masking task (including EEG), but not in the analyses
of other tasks. It did not matter for our results whether this participant was
included in the backward masking task analyses or not.
Attentional Blink. The dependent measures for the AB task were T1
accuracy and T2 | T1 accuracy. In other words, T2 accuracy was based only on
those trials where T1 was correctly reported. For each of these measures, we
computed a 2 (Drug; placebo/cabergoline) x 2 (Lag; 2/8) RM ANOVA. For this task
as well, we computed additional analyses in order to include sEBR and OSPAN as
covariates. Finally, we computed AB size, in order to investigate the relationship
between AB size and our baseline dopamine measures as some (Colzato, Slagter,
Spapé, & Hommel, 2008) but not other studies (Slagter et al., 2012) have found.
Probabilistic discrimination. In the case of the probabilistic discrimination
task, our dependent measure of interest was accuracy. As such, we computed a 2
(Drug; placebo/cabergoline) x 3 (Difficulty; easy/medium/hard) x 5 (Probability;
33
Chapter 2
.2/.35/.5/.65/.8) RM ANOVA. For this analysis as well, we computed additional
models including screening sEBR and OSPAN as covariates.
Our titration procedure was not successful for all participants. As a result,
a number of participants ended up with only two difficulty levels for one out
of two stimuli. For this reason, we repeated the above analysis for both the
group with all difficulty levels (N = 16), and participants who had either two
or three difficulty levels as a result of the titration procedure (N = 24). In this
latter analysis, we excluded the medium difficulty trials. One participant was
excluded from both analyses, because this participant ended up with only one
difficulty level for face stimuli.
All covariates in the above-mentioned RM ANOVAs were centered (van
Breukelen & van Dijk, 2007). For all repeated-measures ANOVA analyses,
whenever Mauchly’s test suggested a violation of sphericity, we report
Geenhouse–Geisser corrected P-values, but uncorrected degrees of freedom.
In order to test for order effects, we repeated each of the RM ANOVAs for our
behavioral paradigms including a between-subject factor indicating whether a
participant received either placebo or cabergoline in the first session.
Bayesian statistics. In order to evaluate evidence in favor of our (null)
hypotheses, we conducted Bayesian statistics. For each reported frequentist
test, we report the Bayes factor corresponding to the inclusion of a factor or
interaction within the model in question (shortened to BF ), compared to
incl
equivalent models stripped of the effect. For example, BF = 10 indicates that
incl
a model including the factor in question is ten times more likely given the data
compared to a model without the variable. Conversely, BF = .1 indicates that
incl
a model without said effect is ten times more likely given the data. All Bayesian
statistics were conducted using JASP (2019, version 0.10.0).
All data visualization was performed with the help of raincloud plots
(Allen, Poggiali, Whitaker, Marshall, & Kievit, 2019), which include the mean,
individual data points, as well as the overall distribution of the measure in
question.
EEG
Recording and preprocessing. EEG data, digitized at 512 Hz, were
continuously recorded in both the placebo and cabergoline session during 6
minutes of sEBR and the backward masking task, using an ActiveTwo system
(BioSemi, Amsterdam, the Netherlands), from 64 scalp electrodes placed
according to the 10/20 system, four electro-oculographic electrodes placed above
and below, and to the side of the eyes, and two external electrodes attached to
each earlobe. EEG data were offline referenced to the average activity recorded
34
Conscious perception and dopamine
at the earlobes, and high-pass ‘firws’ filtered (default settings) at 0.05 Hz using
a Kaiser window, following previous suggestions (Widmann, Schröger, & Maess,
2015). The continuous data were subsequently epoched from −1.5 to 1.5 s around
stimulus presentation and baseline corrected to the average activity between
−200 ms and 0 ms pre-stimulus. Epochs containing EMG artifacts or eye blinks
surrounding stimulus presentation were rejected based on visual inspection.
Extremely noisy or broken channels were interpolated. Remaining eye blink
artifacts were removed by decomposing the EEG data into independent sources
of brain activity using an Independent Component Analysis, and removing eye
blink components from the data for each subject individually. Epochs were low- 2
pass filtered at 30 Hz for visualization purposes only. Preprocessing was done
using the Fieldtrip toolbox (Oostenveld, Fries, Maris, & Schoffelen, 2011) for
Matlab (The MathWorks, Inc. Natick, MA, USA) using custom-written Matlab
scripts.
Analyses. To determine the effect of our manipulations on ERP markers
of information-processing, we examined the effects of SOA and Drug on the
amplitude of the visual-evoked P1 and N1 components, the N2, as well as of the
later P3b (Del Cul, Baillet, & Dehaene, 2007). In line with Del Cul et al (2007),
we epoched the ERP data to the onset of the mask. Next, we subtracted the
data from the mask-only SOA condition from all other SOA conditions. Finally,
we shifted ERP onset back to target onset, in order to compute target-locked
ERPs. Visual inspection of the grand- and condition-average ERPs showed that
the P1 and N1 components peaked over lateral occipitoparietal scalp sites (PO7,
PO3, O1, PO4, PO8, O2), the N2 over centroparietal scalp regions (C1, Cz, C2,
CP1, CPz, CP2), and the P3b over central parietal scalp sites (P1, Pz, P2, PO3,
POz, PO4). These scalp sites were used to determine the peak amplitude and
latency of these components for each condition of interest. Specifically, the
largest positive voltage value between 75–150 ms post-target, and the largest
voltage negativity within 150–225 ms were selected to determine the amplitude
and latency of the P1 and N1 peaks, respectively, for each subject separately.
In the case of the P2 and N2, these intervals were 175-250 ms, and 250-375
ms, respectively. For the P3, an interval of 300-450 ms was used. All average
amplitude values 15 ms around the peak sample, as well as individual latencies
were entered into separate RM ANOVAs with two within-subject factors: SOA
(10 ms, threshold-10 ms, threshold, 100 ms), and Drug (placebo/cabergoline).
Because the mask-only condition is used to acquire ERP data for the remaining
four SOA conditions (see above), the SOA factor contains four instead of five
levels for ERP analyses.
35
Chapter 2
2.4. Results
Physiological and subjective state measures
First, we aimed to establish whether cabergoline exerted physiological effects
(Figure 4). Heart rate decreased over time in both placebo and cabergoline
conditions (F = 11.8, p < .001, 2 = .06, BF > 100), and was overall higher
(2, 48) incl
in the cabergoline condition (F = 9, p = .006, 2 = .03, BF = 57.3), but there
(1, 24η) incl
was no interaction between Time and Drug (F < 1, p = .63, BF = .14; see
(2η, 48) incl
Figure 4a). In the case of diastolic blood pressure as well, we also observed a
decrease over time (F = 21.7, p < .001, 2 = .14, BF > 100), but in this case an
(2, 48) incl
overall lower measurement in the cabergoline condition (F = 9.9, p = .004,
η (1, 24)
2 = .03, BF = 12.4), and again no interaction between Time and Drug (F <
incl (2, 48)
1, p = .42, BF = .2). With regards to systolic blood pressure, we also observed
η incl
a decrease in blood pressure over time (F = 36.7, p < .001, 2 = .22, BF >
(2, 48) incl
100) and an overall lower measurement in the cabergoline condition (F = 9,
η (1, 24)
p = .006, 2 = .03, BF = 31.2), but here a significant interaction between Time
incl
and Drug was found (F = 7.2, p = .002, BF = 5.8; see Figure 4b). Thus, all
η (2, 48) incl
three physiological measures decreased over time. While heart rate was higher,
and diastolic blood pressure lower across the cabergoline session, cabergoline
can only be said to have decreased systolic blood pressure, as indicated by the
interaction between Time and Drug.
Figure 4. Time course and difference between drug conditions in heart rate and blood pressure.
All three physiological measures decreased over time. Cabergoline only affected systolic blood
pressure, while heart rate was higher, and diastolic pressure was lower in the cabergoline versus
placebo session
Cabergoline also affected the subjective state of participants over the course of
the experiment, as indicated by the VAS (visual analog scale, see Figure 5). On the
calmness scale, there was no main effect of Drug (F < 1, p = .63, BF = .23),
(1, 24) incl
36
Conscious perception and dopamine
but calmness increased over the course of the experiment (F = 14.5, p <
(2, 48)
.001, 2 = .04, BF = 31). In addition, we found an interaction between Drug and
incl
Time (F = 5.8, p = .005, 2 = .02, BF = 2), reflecting the fact that calmness
η (2, 48) incl
ratings increased less in the cabergoline condition (Figure 5). In the case of
η
contentedness, there was no main effect of Drug (F < 1, p = .46, BF = .3),
(1, 24) incl
Time (F = 2.7, p = .08, BF = .33), or an interaction between Drug and Time
(2, 48) incl
(F < 1, p = .53, BF = .16; see Figure 5). Finally, alertness decreased over the
(2, 48) incl
course of the experiment (F = 10.3, p = .001, 2 = .12, BF > 100) and was
(2, 48) incl
generally lower in the cabergoline session compared to placebo session (F
η (1,
= 6.3, p = .02, 2 = .01, BF = 1.1), but there was no interaction (F = 1.8, 2
24) incl (2, 48)
p = .18, BF = .21; see Figure 5). Thus, cabergoline decreased self-reported
incl η
ratings of calmness and alertness as the experiment progressed.
Figure 5. Time course and difference between drug conditions in VAS scores for calmness,
contentedness, and alertness. Participants become calmer and less alert over the course of the
experiment. Cabergoline stifled this increase in calmness
85% of participants successfully guessed when they received cabergoline at the
end of the experiment. However, despite these effects, we found no significant
difference in sEBR (spontaneous eye blink rate) between placebo (M = 14 blinks
per minute, SD = 8.9) and cabergoline (M = 15.3, SD = 10.6) (t = -1.2, p = .23,
(24)
BF = .41). In addition, we were unable to replicate the finding by Cavanagh and
01
colleagues (2014) that baseline sEBR conditioned a cabergoline-induced shift in
line with an inverted-U-shape pattern, to the point where high baseline sEBR
(as indicative of high tonic striatal dopamine) is associated with a reduction in
blink rate, whereas low baseline sEBR is linked to an increase in blink rate: we
found that the difference in sEBR between drug conditions was unrelated to
screening sEBR (M = 13.2, SD = 7.8) ( = .23, p = .11).
(25)
τ
37
Chapter 2
Replicating previous findings (Jongkees & Colzato, 2016; Kruis et al., 2016),
sEBR was correlated across sessions: between the placebo and cabergoline
session ( = .63, p < .001), between the screening and cabergoline session
(25)
( = .37, p = .01), as well as between the screening and placebo session
(25) τ
( = .32, p = .03; see Figure 6a). The latter two correlations did not survive a
τ(25)
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons using a corrected alpha level
τ
of .05 / 6 = .0083, based on all correlations computed in this section. Together
these results lend support to the robustness of the measure when measured at
the same time of day (Barbato et al., 2000; Jongkees & Colzato, 2016). However,
despite the proposed relation between sEBR and OSPAN as a biomarker of
striatal dopamine, we found no relationship between these measures in either
the cabergoline ( = .06, p = .67) or placebo session ( = .06, p = .67). This
(25) (25)
relationship was absent even when these measures were collected in the same
τ τ
session; namely, during screening ( = -.11, p = .47; see Figure 6b). Finally,
(25)
alertness, as indicated by our simple RT task also did not differ between the
τ
placebo (M = 224 ms, SD = 15.8) and cabergoline condition (M = 225 ms, SD = 15.1)
(t = -.54, p = .59).
(25)
Thus, cabergoline did not affect sEBR or our objective measure of alertness.
Figure 6. The relationship between sEBR measures among themselves and in relation to OSPAN.
All sEBR measures were found to be positively correlated (a), but we found no relationship be-
tween sEBR and OSPAN (b)
Main experimental paradigms
We next examined potential effects of cabergoline on our main experimental
measures of interest: target identification accuracy and processing in the
backward masking task, attentional blink size in the attentional blink task, and
38
Conscious perception and dopamine
discrimination accuracy under varying conditions of difficulty and probability
in the probabilistic discrimination task. To foreshadow our results, cabergoline
did not affect any of the key behavioral findings associated with these tasks,
whether sEBR or OSPAN were included as covariates in the analyses or not.
Neither did it affect neural processing of the target in the backward masking
task, as shown by ERP analyses. Yet, importantly, we did replicate all standard
findings typically obtained with these tasks (e.g., effects of masking on target-
evoked ERPs, the attentional blink).
Backward masking 2
Behavior. As is typically observed (e.g., Breitmeyer, 2007) and shown in
Figure 7, targets were more often identified correctly in the backward masking
task as the delay between target and mask (SOA) increased (F = 187.4, p <
(4, 100)
.001, 2 = .79, BF > 100). Yet, in contrast to our main prediction that cabergoline
incl
would affect participant’s ability to detect targets, there was no interaction
η
between Drug and SOA (F < 1, p = .56; BF = .03; see Figure 7). We also
(4, 100) incl
did not find an overall difference between placebo and cabergoline on target
identification accuracy (F < 1, p = .85, BF = .13). Controlling for screening
(1, 25) incl
sEBR, OSPAN, or the combination of both did not change the results. Neither
did the inclusion of a between-subject factor for drug order. We repeated these
analyses with d’ as the dependent variable, but results were equivalent.
Similarly, in the case of confidence scores, cabergoline did not affect
reported confidence ratings, as indicated by the lack of an interaction between
SOA and Drug (F = 1.6, p = .21; BF = .06; see Figure 7). We also found
(4, 100) incl
no overall difference between drug conditions (F < 1, p = .63; BF = .14),
(1, 25) incl
but participants did report an improvement in response confidence as SOA
increased (F = 204.8, p < .001, 2 = .8; BF > 100). Again, correcting for
(4, 100) incl
baseline dopamine measures or drug order had no impact on the results. As
η
with d’, repeating these analyses with meta-d’ as the dependent variable made
no difference. Thus, we replicated a similar pattern of results with regards to
both objective and subjective aspects of the participant’s response during
backward masking (Del Cul et al., 2007), but these patterns were not affected
by cabergoline.
39
Chapter 2
Figure 7. Mean accuracy and confidence scores in the backward masking task across five possi-
ble SOAs and both drug conditions. While both accuracy (a) and confidence (b) scaled with the
duration of SOA, cabergoline had no effect on either of these measures
EEG. In addition to these behavioral masking effects, we replicated previous
reports that target-evoked ERP components scale with the duration of target-
mask SOA (Del Cul et al., 2007). We found a strong effect of SOA on the amplitude
and peak-latency of the target-evoked P1, N1, N2, and P3b components. However,
in the case of our ERP results as well, each of these measures was unaffected
by cabergoline (see Table 2 and Figure 8). In order to remain close to previous
studies (Del Cul et al., 2007), we repeated these analyses with an average
reference instead of an earlobe reference, but the conclusions belonging to these
results remained the same. Thus, cabergoline did not affect the threshold for
conscious perception by modulating neural target processing.
Table 2. Summary of the statistical analyses performed on ERP data.
Component Measure SOA (F =) Drug (F =) SOA*Drug (F =)
(3, 75) (1, 25) (3, 75)
P1 Amplitude 51.7, p < .001* .01, p = .91, BF = .16 .62, p = .60, BF = .08
incl incl
Latency 8.2, p < .001* .17, p = .68, BF = .16 .48, p = .7, BF = .08
incl incl
N1 Amplitude 12.4, p < .001* .04, p = .85, BF = .15 .44, p = .73, BF = .06
incl incl
Latency 66.8, p < .001* .33, p = .57, BF = .19 .07, p = .98, BF = .06
incl incl
N2 Amplitude 4.7, p = .005* .04, p = .83, BF = .15 .21, p = .89, BF = .06
incl incl
Latency 99.3, p < .001* 2.9, p = .1, BF = .38 .09, p = .97, BF = .06
incl incl
P3b Amplitude 57.2, p < .001* .02, p = .9, BF = .15 .9, p = .44, BF = .07
incl incl
Latency 10, p < .001* .1, p = .74, BF = .15 1.7, p = .18, BF = .09
incl incl
* = BF > 100
incl
40
Conscious perception and dopamine
2
Figure 8. Effects of cabergoline on target-evoked ERPs in the backward masking task. This figure
displays the grand-average target-evoked ERPs for P3b electrodes (P1, Pz, P2, PO3, POz, PO4)
for both drug conditions combined (a) and separately (b), per target-mask SOA condition (10,
40, 50, 60, 70, and 100 ms). This figure shows that while ERP amplitudes and latencies generally
increased as a function of target-mask SOA, these measures were unaffected by cabergoline.
Attentional blink
As expected and shown in Figure 9, we found a robust attentional blink: T2|T1
accuracy was significantly worse when T2 was presented after one distractor
(lag 2) compared to seven distractors (lag 8; F = 43.9, p < .001, 2 = .39; BF
(1, 24) incl
> 100). T2|T1 accuracy was marginally better in the cabergoline condition
η
(81.9±11%) compared to placebo (79.7±14%; F = 4.2, p = .052; BF = .34), but
(1, 24) incl
we found no interaction between Lag and Drug (F = 1.42, p = .25; BF = .3).
(1, 24) incl
Figure 9. Mean accuracy for T1 and T2|T1 at lag 2 and lag 8. While we replicated behavioral
findings common to the attentional blink paradigm, cabergoline did not affect the attentional blink
When we controlled for baseline dopamine measures (i.e., baseline OSPAN
and sEBR), the inclusion of OSPAN did not affect the results, and controlling
for sEBR also did not reveal a critical interaction between Lag and Drug (F
(1,
= 1.3, p = .26; BF = .3). We did find a between-subject effect of screening
22) incl
41
Chapter 2
sEBR (F = 5.2, p = .03; BF = 2.5), which exacerbated the main effect of Drug
(1, 22) incl
(F = 5.4, p = .029; 2 = .004; BF = .36). In addition, we found an interaction
(1, 22) incl
between sEBR and Drug (F = 5.8, p = .025; 2 = .005): sEBR correlated with
η (1, 22)
overall T2|T1 accuracy in the placebo ( = -.31, p = .03), but slightly less so in
(25) η
the cabergoline ( = -.26, p = .07) condition.
(25) τ
Although the critical three-way interaction between sEBR, Lag and Drug
τ
was not significant, we also found an interaction between screening sEBR and
Lag (F = 5, p = .036; 2 = .004). This interaction is best understood in terms
(1, 22)
of the relationship between sEBR and AB size (Colzato et al., 2008; Slagter et
η
al., 2012); namely, the difference in T2|T1 accuracy between lag 2 and 8. AB size
ranged from -2.9% to 59.7% in the placebo condition, and from 0% to 47.5% in
the cabergoline condition. The interaction between sEBR and Lag stems from
a small correlation between screening sEBR and AB size in the cabergoline
( = .31, p = .03) and placebo condition ( = .28, p = .047). We found no other
(25) (25)
relationships between dopamine baseline measures and the AB; the difference in
τ τ
AB size between the cabergoline and placebo session was unrelated to screening
sEBR ( = .05, p = .71). For the cabergoline session, there was no relation
(25)
between AB size and sEBR ( = .13, p = .35), nor between AB size and OSPAN
τ (25)
( = .08, p = .57; see Figure 10a). Similarly, for the placebo session we did not
(25) τ
find a relationship either between AB size and sEBR ( = .15, p = .3), nor OSPAN
τ (25)
( = .02, p = .89, see Figure 10b). However, none of the correlations reported in
(25) τ
this section survived a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons using
τ
a corrected alpha level of .05 / 9 = .0056, based on all correlations computed in
this section. Thus, we found no strong support for a relationship between sEBR
and the AB, or OSPAN and the AB, nor did controlling for these factors reveal
drug-related effects on the AB.
When controlling for drug order, we found an interaction between Drug
and drug Order (F = 5.7, p = .027; 2 = .004; BF = .43). When participants
(1, 21) incl
received placebo first, they were less accurate overall in identifying T2|T1 in the
η
placebo condition (77.5±15%), compared to the cabergoline condition (81.6±11%).
For participants who received cabergoline first, this difference was not present
(placebo: 82.1±12%, cabergoline: 82.3±10%). No other order effects were present.
Together these results indicate that cabergoline did not affect the attentional
blink.
We found no difference in T1 accuracy between the placebo and cabergoline
condition (F < 1, p = .49; BF = .27), or an interaction between Drug and
(1, 24) incl
Lag (F < 1, p = .5; BF = .32), but T1 accuracy was worse when T2 was
(1, 24) incl
presented after only one distractor (lag 2; F = 46.6, p < .001, 2 = .16; BF >
(1, 24) incl
η
42
Conscious perception and dopamine
100). Controlling for sEBR, OSPAN, or drug order did not affect the results for T1
accuracy. Thus, cabergoline also did not affect T1 identification.
2
Figure 10. The relationship between AB size and striatal-dopamine proxy measures. Both for the
cabergoline and placebo condition, we found a positive relation between AB size and screening
sEBR, while such a relationship was not present neither for sEBR measured within the same
session, nor for OSPAN
Probabilistic discrimination
In our final experimental paradigm, participants were tasked with
discriminating between face and house stimuli that varied in difficulty
and probability of occurrence (see Methods). Cabergoline did not affect
discrimination accuracy (specifically: hit-rate; F = 2.4, p = .13, BF = .35).
(1, 23) incl
Neither did we find an interaction between Drug and Difficulty (F < 1, p = .91,
(1, 23)
BF = .14), Drug and Probability (F < 1, p = .78, BF = .02), or a three-way
incl (4, 92) incl
interaction (F < 1, p = .48, BF = .05; see Figure 11a). Thus, cabergoline
(4, 92) incl
did not significantly affect perception on this task either. Standard effects
observed with this task in non-drug studies were replicated (Bauer et al., 2016,
September): accuracy was lower on difficult (F = 208.3, p < .001, 2 = .60, BF
(1, 23) incl
> 100), and on low-probability trials (F = 22.49, p < .001, 2 = .04, BF > 100).
(4, 92) η incl
When we controlled for screening sEBR and OSPAN, this did not change the
η
results. We did find an interaction between drug Order and Drug (F = 5.2,
(4, 88)
p = .03, BF = 1.3). Opposite to what we found for the attentional blink task,
incl
when participants received placebo first, they were more accurate overall in
the placebo (84±7%) compared to the cabergoline (82.4±7%) condition. When
cabergoline was administered first, this difference was absent (placebo:
83.5±5%, cabergoline: 83.1±4%). We found no other order effects.
43
Chapter 2
When we repeated these analyses for participants with all three difficulty
levels for both stimuli after titration (N = 16; see Methods), the same pattern of
results was obtained. Cabergoline did not affect discrimination accuracy (F
(1,
< 1, p = .47, BF = .69), and we found no two-way interaction between Drug
15) incl
and Difficulty (F < 1, p = .59, BF = .05), Drug and Probability (F < 1,
(2, 30) incl (4, 60)
p = .76, BF = .02), or a three-way interaction (F = 1.1, p = .4, BF = .04; see
incl (8, 120) incl
Figure 11b). Accuracy was still lower on difficult (F = 233.8, p < .001, 2 = .53,
(2, 30)
BF > 100) and low-probability trials (F = 21.1, p < .001, 2 = .08, BF > 100).
incl (4, 60) incηl
Controlling for screening sEBR and OSPAN did not change the acquired results.
η
The interaction between drug Order and Drug was maintained (F = 9.9,
(1, 14)
p = .007, BF > 100), where overall accuracy was higher in the placebo condition
incl
(83±7%) when placebo was administered first compared to the cabergoline
condition (80.6±6%). This difference was again absent when cabergoline was
administered first (placebo: 82.7±3%, cabergoline: 83.1±3%).
Thus, we found no evidence in support of the conclusion that cabergoline
affected any of the key findings in our perceptual tasks.
Figure 11. Cabergoline did not affect probabilistic discrimination performance. This figure shows
mean accuracy for each drug condition and across five stimulus probabilities for all participants
with two (a; N = 24) and three (b; N = 16) difficulty levels after titration. While accuracy was
higher for easy trials and blocks in which the presented stimulus was more likely to occur, these
effects were unaffected by cabergoline. Medium-difficulty trials take up position in between
easy and hard trials in terms of mean accuracy when included
44
Conscious perception and dopamine
2.5. Discussion
This double blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study tested the hypothesis
that striatal dopamine is involved in conscious perception by administering
the dopamine D2 agonist cabergoline and placebo to healthy participants. To
that end 1) we established an effect of cabergoline on participant’s physiological
and subjective state, 2) we tested the effect of cabergoline on two often-used
dopamine proxy measures (sEBR and OSPAN), and 3) we subjected participants
to well-known and often-employed experimental paradigms targeting the
neural correlates of consciousness. While we were able to establish an effect of 2
cabergoline on participant’s physiological and subjective state, we did not find
an effect of cabergoline on sEBR. Crucially, while we replicated key behavioral
and ERP findings associated with the paradigms we employed (Del Cul et al.,
2007; Slagter et al., 2017; Van Opstal et al., 2014), none of these findings were
affected by cabergoline. Thus, we did not obtain evidence that the dopamine D2
agonist cabergoline affected conscious perception, which was also supported
by Bayesian statistics.
Just as with positive results, an observed null result could indicate a true
effect (i.e., no role for striatal dopamine in conscious perception), or it could
be due to uncontrolled or unknown factors. Based on the convergent evidence
discussed in the introduction implicating the striatum and its irrigation by
dopamine in conscious perception (e.g., Bisenius et al., 2015; Slagter et al., 2017;
Van Opstal et al., 2014), we predicted that cabergoline would affect performance
on the backward masking and attentional blink tasks. Yet, our Bayesian results
provided evidence against an effect of 1.5mg cabergoline (all BF < .7; except
incl
for the interaction between Drug and drug Order for discrimination accuracy
in the probabilistic discrimination task). This absence of an effect is further
strengthened by the fact that other studies using different cognitive tasks have
previously reported significant effects of cabergoline on task performance using
a similar or an even lower dose of orally administered cabergoline (Broadway
et al., 2018; Cavanagh et al., 2014; Fallon et al., 2017; Frank & O’Reilly, 2006;
Norbury et al., 2013; Nandam et al., 2013; Yousif et al., 2016). These observations
together argue for an interpretation in terms of a true null result. Nonetheless,
there are a number of practical limitations that pertain to the present study.
For one, blinding was unsuccessful as 85% of participants guessed when
they received cabergoline at the end of the experiment. While all participants
with adverse reactions were excluded from any analyses, we cannot exclude
the possibility that participants’ ability to tell when they received cabergoline
influenced the results. It is possible this ability stems from the higher dosage
45
Chapter 2
(1.5 mg) we employed compared to previous studies administering cabergoline
(1-1.25 mg; Broadway et al., 2018; Cavanagh et al., 2014; Frank & O’Reilly, 2006;
Norbury et al., 2013; Nandam et al., 2013; Yousif et al., 2016). While a lower dosage
may benefit blinding, it may also further reduce the chance of finding an effect
of cabergoline. Another option for future research would be to administer an
antiemetic such as domperidone in combination with cabergoline, in order to
mitigate and mask physical side effects (Fallon et al., 2017; Norbury et al., 2013).
Second, while we titrated performance on the backward masking and
probabilistic discrimination tasks, we did not do so for the attentional blink
task, which may have resulted in reduced sensitivity of this task to our
dopamine manipulation. We chose this specific version of the task in order
to stay as close as possible to a recent study in which we found a relationship
between activity in the ventral striatum and the attentional blink (Slagter et al.,
2017). While we cannot rule out that a titration procedure may have resulted in
a task more sensitive to our manipulation, we believe this is unlikely given that
our participants showed a robust attentional blink, indicating that our task was
suitable for the effect we intended to manipulate. In addition, since cabergoline
did not affect performance on the two tasks we did titrate, we believe it unlikely
that this would have been different in the case of the attentional blink task.
Third, a limitation of our study pertains to the use of alleged indirect
measures of dopamine activity: sEBR (Jongkees & Colzato, 2016) and the OSPAN
task (Cools, Gibbs, Miyakawa, Jagust, & D’Esposito, 2008). The functioning of
dopamine relies on a relative equilibrium at the system level (i.e. frontal versus
basal ganglia; Wiecki & Frank, 2013; Wise, Murray, & Gerfen, 1996), within the
basal ganglia itself (i.e., direct versus indirect pathways; Redgrave et al., 2010),
and at the level of synapses (i.e., pre- versus postsynaptic effects; Frank &
O’Reilly, 2006; Usiello et al., 2000). The equilibrium at the system- and pathway-
level is in turn implicated in the differing effects at the receptor level (i.e., D1
versus D2 receptors; Shen, Flajolet, Greengard, & Surmeier, 2008). Due to the
complexity and the multitude of interactions between different systems it is
especially important to be able to report on the initial state of the dopamine-
system.
Unfortunately, sEBR was unaffected by cabergoline. While this finding goes
against studies with humans showing effects of dopaminergic drugs on sEBR
(Blin, Masson, Azulay, Fondarai, & Serratrice, 1990; Karson, 1983; Strakowski &
Sax, 1998), this finding fits with several pharmacological studies that reported
no effect (Depue, Luciana, Arbisi, Collins, & Leon, 1994; Ebert, 1996; Mohr,
Sándor, Landis, Fathi, & Brugger, 2005; van der Post, de Waal, de Kam, Cohen,
& van Gerven, 2004).
46
Conscious perception and dopamine
Moreover, differences in OSPAN and sEBR were unpredictive for the effect
of cabergoline on performance in our experimental paradigms. These findings
are surprising in light of previous work showing how effects of cabergoline on
cognitive function depend on individual baseline sEBR (Cavanagh et al., 2014)
and OSPAN score (Broadway et al., 2018). However, it should be emphasized that
evidence for a relationship between dopamine-proxy measures and dopamine
levels is often correlational, based on studies with small sample sizes (N < 50;
Cools et al., 2008), and that results are mixed (Dang et al., 2017; Sescousse et
al., 2018). It is debatable whether such small-sample studies have adequate
power to provide evidence for this relationship (Cremers, Wager, & Yarkoni, 2
2017; Rousselet & Pernet, 2012). Similarly, the correlational findings we report
should also be interpreted cautiously. While measures such as OSPAN and sEBR
are easy to administer, the correlational evidence – as well as inconsistent
findings regarding these measures (Dang et al., 2017; Jongkees & Colzato, 2016;
Sescousse et al., 2018) – put pressure on their validity as an index of baseline
dopamine levels.
Despite these practical limitations, the advantage of our study is that
our results are univocal: the administration of cabergoline had no effect on
any of our indices of conscious perception obtained using often-employed
experimental paradigms in the study of consciousness. Of importance, we
did consistently replicate all key behavioral and event-related potential (ERP)
findings associated with each of these tasks.
Theoretically, perhaps our null-findings are best explained by an appeal
to predictive processing approaches to brain function (Hohwy, 2012; 2013;
de Lange, Heilbron, & Kok, 2018). From the perspective of these theories, the
brain is viewed as a prediction machine which is continuously revising its
predictions about the causes of sensory data. On this view, top-down signals
in perceptual hierarchies carry perceptual predictions, while bottom-up signals
convey perceptual prediction errors. Perception becomes a process of continual
minimization of prediction errors across hierarchical levels, instantiating a
process of approximate Bayesian inference on the causes of sensory signals. In
this process, dopamine is thought to regulate the relative precision of top-down
predictions and bottom-up prediction errors, where precision is understood as
inverse variance (Friston et al., 2012): a higher (expected) variance of sensory
signals leads to a smaller influence on updating perceptual predictions. “If
true, this means that modulators of synaptic gain (like dopamine) do not report
perceptual content but the context in which percepts are formed. In other
words, dopamine reports the precision or salience of sensorimotor constructs
47
Chapter 2
(representations) encoded by the activity of the synapses they modulate.”
(Friston et al., 2012, p. 2).
From this perspective, there may not have been enough uncertainty in our
experimental paradigms for our dopamine manipulation to play a determining
role. Indeed, previous studies employing cabergoline in the context of working
memory found an effect under conditions where task-relevant targets were
embedded in a larger perceptual field; namely, in the presence of distractors.
In these studies, cabergoline exerted an effect on task performance in terms
of target-detection accuracy and successful recall when a target stood in
competition with other stimuli (Broadway et al., 2018; Cavanagh et al., 2014;
Frank & O’Reilly, 2006). In the case of each of our tasks, targets were consistently
surrounded by distracting information temporally, but never spatially. Perhaps
the selective functionalities of the basal ganglia and dopaminergic firing
actualize primarily when the system is under pressure to select sensorimotor
constructs in the face of multidimensional uncertainty.
Our data cast doubt on a causal role for dopamine in visual perception, as
shown by a significant lack of effect in several standard perceptual paradigms.
Future studies, perhaps with more direct measures of dopaminergic activity, and
more naturalistic paradigms including more opportunities for selection and/or
uncertainty, may yet reveal a more specific influence of this neurotransmitter
on how we perceptually encounter the world.
Funding information
This work was supported by an ERC starting grant to HAS by the H2020
European Research Council [ERC-2015-STG-679399] and an Amsterdam Brain
and Cognition (ABC) grant to HAS, AKS and CSL. AKS is additionally grateful to
the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) Azrieli Programme on
Brain, Mind, and Consciousness, and to the Dr. Mortimer and Theresa Sackler
Foundation.
48
Conscious perception and dopamine
2
49
Chapter 3
Conscious perception and the role of the basal
ganglia: preliminary findings from a deep brain
stimulation study
In preparation as:
Boonstra E. A., Bais, M. N., van Schouwenburg M. R., van den Munckhof, P., Smit,
D. J. A., Denys, D., & Slagter, H.A. (in prep.). Conscious perception and the role of
the basal ganglia: preliminary findings from a deep brain stimulation study.
Chapter 3
3.1. Abstract
Conscious perception is thought to depend on global amplification of sensory
input. In recent years, the basal ganglia have been implicated in gating conscious
access due to their consistent involvement in thalamocortical loops. However,
much of the evidence implicating the basal ganglia in these processes in humans
is correlational. The current study is a preliminary investigation in four patients
to explore whether deep brain stimulation (DBS) in the basal ganglia might
improve conscious perception. In our study, treatment-resistant obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD) patients with a striatal DBS implant completed
two canonical conscious perception tasks: emotion-induced blindness and
backward masking. We found preliminary evidence in support of a role played
by the basal ganglia in conscious perception at the behavioral level: patients
performed better when stimulation was active, but we could not establish neural
effects corresponding to these behavioral findings, possibly due to our small
sample size. We discuss the potential implications and limitations of our study
and delineate avenues for future research.
52
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
3.2. Introduction
The relationship between consciousness and the brain is often considered as one
of the major frontiers of contemporary science. Within the context of conscious
visual perception, one major outstanding question concerns how a stimulus
becomes accessible for report. Influential theoretical accounts have proposed
that such accessibility requires “broadcasting” of a stimulus to the whole brain
through thalamocortical circuits (Crick & Koch, 2003; Dehaene & Changeux,
2011; Edelman, 2003). The basal ganglia (BG) are a cluster of subcortical nuclei
located deep in the brain, which modulate these circuits (Smith et al., 2004),
and as such, may gate conscious perception. For decades we have known that
BG structures contribute to sensory and perceptual processes (Afrasiabi et al., 3
2021; Alexander & Crutcher, 1990; Arsalidou et al., 2013; Brown et al., 1997; Seger,
2013), in line with the notion that the BG not only perform action selection,
but fulfill a general selection function, including selection for conscious
perception (e.g., Redgrave et al., 1999). It is notable in this respect that fMRI
studies consistently show differences in BOLD activity in the striatum between
consciously perceived and unconscious stimuli using backward masking tasks
(Bisenius et al. 2015). Another repeated finding is a relationship between striatal
D2 receptor binding and performance on conscious perception tasks (Bisenius et
al., 2015; Slagter et al., 2010, 2012; Van Opstal et al., 2014; but see Boonstra et al.,
2020). Most of these studies employ neuroimaging, and thereby lack temporal
precision and/or a direct measure of BG activity. This has left it largely unclear
how the BG may contribute to conscious perception in humans.
In recent years, deep brain stimulation (DBS) electrodes have proven an
effective tool to not only modulate BG structures, but also to measure their
activity. DBS involves an invasive procedure leveraged to alleviate symptoms
of several treatment-resistant neurological and psychiatric pathologies such
as Parkinson’s disease (Almeida et al., 2017), anorexia nervosa (Whiting et al.,
2018), depression (Dandekar et al., 2018), and obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD, Baldermann et al., 2021). A previous study employed an attentional blink
task to probe conscious perception in patients with DBS electrodes implanted
in the ventral striatum (Slagter et al., 2017). The attentional blink comprises a
deficit in consciously perceiving the second of two targets (T1 and T2) whenever
it follows the first target within 100–500 ms in a rapid stream of distractors
(Raymond et al., 1992). Patients performed this task while intracranial EEG
(iEEG) activity from the ventral striatum was recorded using the DBS electrodes
without stimulation. Intracranial EEG recordings revealed a consistent burst
in theta-band activity only when T2 was consciously perceived (Slagter et al.,
53
Chapter 3
2017). Moreover, increased activity in and low frequencies after perceiving
T1 was observed in trials in which subjects subsequently failed to perceive T2,
α β
possibly reflecting attentional capture by T1. These findings support the notion
that the BG contribute to conscious experience. Yet, like neuroimaging, they
only provide correlational evidence.
In the present study, we present preliminary data from a small sample
of four treatment-resistant OCD patients with DBS electrodes implanted in
the ventral striatum. The efficacy of DBS treatment in OCD patients is still
under active investigation, but evidence thus far encourages further study
(Acevedo et al., 2021; Graat et al., 2021; van Wingen et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2021). Our study goes beyond past work in that we were able to record iEEG
during DBS. We were thereby able to causally manipulate and measure striatal
activity simultaneously, while patients performed two canonical conscious
perception paradigms: emotion-induced blindness (EIB) and backward masking
(BM). This setup allowed us to establish a more conclusive role for the ventral
striatum in conscious perception compared to the earlier study by our group.
We concurrently measured scalp EEG, permitting investigation of the effects
of DBS on common event-related potentials (ERPs) markers of conscious
perception (see Hypotheses below). Moreover, the two tasks allowed us to probe
a participant’s stimulus detection ability both when the perception of a target
is complicated by an emotionally valenced (positive or negative; EIB), as well as
a neutral disturbance (BM). Taken together, this setup allowed us to examine if
causal perturbation of striatal activity would affect conscious perception within
the context of these tasks.
Hypotheses
Emotion-induced blindness refers to an impaired awareness of stimuli
appearing soon after an irrelevant, emotionally arousing stimulus (Most et
al., 2005). It is therefore an effect similar to the attentional blink, except that
instead of T1, emotionally arousing or valence neutral distractors are presented
200-800 ms before the target. This manipulation of emotional arousal allowed
us to vary the degree to which distractors may capture attention in an attempt
to extend previous findings (Slagter et al., 2017).
Behaviorally, OFF DBS, we expected to find an effect akin to a standard
attentional blink, based on past EIB studies (Kennedy et al., 2014; Most et al.,
2005), as reflected in lower accuracy when the lag between the distractor and
target is short rather than long. We expected this difference to be larger for
targets preceded by negative distractors compared to neutral distractors due to
increased attentional capture. In terms of ERPs derived from scalp EEG data, a
54
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
usual finding for the EIB task is that N2 and P3 components are suppressed for
targets following an emotionally arousing distractor (Kennedy et al., 2014). We
expected to replicate these findings for targets following a negative distractor
OFF DBS.
In the backward masking task, the order of distractor and target is
reversed. A target is presented first, followed by a mask (akin to a distractor)
at a variable delay, known as the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA). In this task,
patients indicated whether the target, a number, was smaller or larger than
five. Commonly, accuracy is better when the delay between target and mask is
long rather than short (Breitmeyer, 2007). Behaviorally, OFF DBS, we expected
to replicate this finding in terms of improved accuracy for longer SOAs. Our
task departs from the standard version in that patients do not only report on 3
the target, but simultaneously indicate the confidence in their response (sure/
unsure). Like accuracy, we expected response confidence to improve with
increased SOA duration. The reason to include a confidence measure is that
the ventral striatum is thought to be involved in determining self-confidence
(Kiverstein et al., 2019). We expected DBS ON to improve patients’ accuracy and
response confidence. In terms of scalp ERPs, increased ERP amplitude is usually
found as SOA increases (Del Cul et al., 2007).
Our study is novel in that we could investigate changes in neural oscillatory
activity recorded from the ventral striatum within the context of an EIB and
BM task ON and OFF DBS. Based on our previous iEEG attentional blink study
(Slagter et al., 2017), OFF DBS, we expected that only consciously perceived
targets would be associated with an increase in θ activity between 150 and 400
ms after stimulus onset. In the EIB task, we also expected that failure to perceive
the target would be foreshadowed by a distractor-induced increase in α and
low β oscillatory activity. Moreover, in the case of EIB, we expected DBS ON
to reduce capture by negative distractors and thereby to improve accuracy. At
the neural level, we expected this change to be reflected in a reduced activity
in α and early β frequencies immediately following the distractor, as well as an
increased θ burst and larger N2 and P3 amplitudes to seen targets. In the BM
task, we similarly expected the stimulation to increase induced θ activity and
N2 and P3 amplitudes to seen targets.
Below, we present preliminary findings against the background of earlier work
suggesting that DBS may alter patient’s capacity for conscious perception.
However, given our small sample size of only four patients, we present solely
descriptive statistics and graphical analysis, necessitating more research to
substantiate these findings.
55
Chapter 3
3.3. Methods
Participants
Eleven therapy-resistant OCD patients eligible for deep brain stimulation
(DBS) were recruited from the outpatient clinic for DBS at the department of
Psychiatry of the Amsterdam University Medical Center, location Academic
Medical Center (AMC) from 2015-2020. Alcohol or substance abuse in the past
6 months was a reason for exclusion from the study. Out of the eleven patients
recruited, four participated in the tasks comprising the present study (mean
age: 48 years, range: 35-61, 3 women, 1 man). Not all eleven patients completed
the tasks of the current study because initially the study protocol spanned a
full year with the current tasks at the end, for which it turned out the battery
life of the stimulator was not suited. One patient performed at chance level in
the backward masking (BM) task and was thus excluded from further analyses,
resulting in a sample of three patients for this task (mean age: 43 years, range:
35-54, 3 women). All participants were right-handed and took their standard
medications. Medications included clomipramine (37.5-75 mg), quetiapine (300
mg), oxazepam (10 mg), fluvoxamine (25-100 mg), fluoxetine (60 mg), lithium
carbonate (1000 mg), mirtazapine (45 mg), olanzapine (15 mg), promethazine
(25 mg), and lorazepam (1.5 mg). The study was approved by the medical ethics
board of the AMC and all patients provided written consent to participate. The
trial was registered in the Netherlands Trial Register (Trial NL7486). Patients
also performed several other tasks on different study visits (data to be published
elsewhere, e.g., Fridgeirsson et al., 2021).
Experimental Paradigms
Stimuli were presented at a distance of 70 cm on a 15.4-inch laptop screen
(HP 6730b, refresh rate = 60 Hz, resolution 1024x768). Due to limited storage
capacity of the DBS recording device, and to maximize the number of trials,
patients completed a variable number of trials on each block for both tasks.
Emotion-Induced Blindness
The emotion-induced blindness task consisted of a central rapid serial visual
presentation of briefly (100 ms) presented pictures of landscapes (6.5° wide and
4.9° high) against a black background. Participants were instructed to identify
target in this stream (a rotated landscape 90°), and to indicate whether this
target was rotated left or right (Fig. 1). As a third response option they could
indicate no rotated picture was present (no target). Before the presentation of a
target, which was present in each trial, on approximately 86% of trials, a task-
56
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
irrelevant distractor image was shown, which could be either a neutral image
or a negative image, or on approximately 14% of trials, there was no distractor
at all. The valence and arousal of these images were rated by the participants
themselves on a scale from 1 to 9 on a separate occasion. The 40 most negatively
rated pictures served as negative distractors. As neutral distractors we selected
40 pictures rated both least arousing and least positive (but not negative). The
target followed the distractor either after 200 ms or 800 ms. Each trial started
with an intertrial interval of 200 ms, after which a stimulus stream consisting
of 17 stimuli began. A white central fixation cross was visible throughout
the experiment. All stimuli were presented using Presentation (version 14.5;
Neurobehavioural Systems) at the center of the screen.
3
Figure 1. Experimental procedure for one trial of the emotion-induced blindness task
Backward Masking
The backward masking task was adapted from Van Opstal and colleagues (2014;
see Fig. 2). Participants indicated whether briefly presented masked digits (1, 4,
6, or 9) were smaller or larger than 5 and simultaneously rated their confidence
in their response, resulting in four response options (>5 sure, >5 unsure, <5 sure,
<5 unsure). Responses were counterbalanced in terms of left and right across
participants. Each trial started with the presentation of a central fixation cross
(53 point Courier New), which increased in size (106 point Courier New, 150 ms
duration), cueing the impending target. The target stimulus (53 point Courier
57
Chapter 3
New) then appeared for 16 ms at one of two positions centered at the vertical
midline (top or bottom, 3.9° from fixation). Both stimulus locations were equally
probable. A mask followed the target (200 ms duration) at a variable stimulus
onset asynchrony (SOA), with a duration of 16, 33, 50, 66, or 100 ms. By varying
the delay between cue and target dependent on SOA, the delay between cue
and mask was held constant at 800 ms. The mask (53 point Courier New) was
composed of two letters “E” and two letters “M”, tightly surrounding the
target location without superimposing or touching it. All stimuli were black
and presented on a white background, using the Psychophysics toolbox for
MATLAB (Brainard, 1997). The central fixation cross was visible throughout
the experiment.
Figure 2. Experimental procedure for one trial of the backward masking task (adapted from Van
Opstal et al. 2014)
Neural data recording and preprocessing
Preprocessing was done using the Fieldtrip toolbox (Oostenveld et al., 2011) for
Matlab (The MathWorks, Inc. Natick, MA, USA) using custom-written scripts.
DBS and Intracranial EEG
Two quadripolar electrodes (Model 3389 Medtronics) with 4 contact points of
1.5 mm each separated by 0.5 mm were implanted stereotactically. Implantation
was performed bilaterally through the anterior limb of the internal capsule with
the deepest, i.e. most ventral, contact point located in the nucleus accumbens,
3 mm anterior to the anterior commissure and the 3 upper contact points
positioned in the ventral part of the anterior limb of the internal capsule
(vALIC). The neurostimulator used was the Activa PC + S (Medtronics; model
37604) which allows both for stimulating and recording local field potentials
(LFPs) with the recording and stimulation part of the device being completely
58
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
separated. Stimulation was performed through the middle two contact points
at 130 Hz.
Intracranial EEG was recorded from the deepest contact point in the nucleus
accumbens using the 8180 Sensing Programmer SW (Medtronic Inc.) with a
sampling rate of 422 Hz Using hardware 0.5 Hz high pas filtering and 100 Hz
low pass filtering. LFP data were high-pass “firws” filtered (default settings) at
0.5 Hz using a Kaiser window (Widmann et al., 2015). The continuous data were
subsequently epoched from −1.5 to 2 s around stimulus presentation to facilitate
time-frequency decomposition and baseline corrected to the average activity
between −500 ms and -200 ms pre-stimulus in line with Slagter and colleagues
(2017). Epochs containing eye blinks surrounding stimulus presentation
were rejected based on the visual inspection of the scalp EEG data, that was 3
concurrently measured.
Scalp EEG
EEG was recorded at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz using a 64-channel recording
system with shielded Ag/AgCl electrodes (ANT Neuro B.V.) following the
international 10–10 system. EEG data were high-pass “firws” filtered (default
settings) at 0.1 Hz using a Kaiser window (Widmann et al. 2015) and low-pass
filtered at 50 Hz due to noise from the DBS implant. Data were offline referenced
to the average of all electrodes except LFP, EOG, and mastoid electrodes. The
continuous data were subsequently epoched from −1.5 to 1.5 s around stimulus
presentation and baseline corrected to the average activity between −500 ms and
200 ms pre-stimulus. We used this time window for both tasks to exclude the
distractor in our baseline window in the EIB task, and to remain consistent with
iEEG time-frequency analyses. Epochs containing EMG artifacts or eye blinks
surrounding stimulus presentation were rejected based on visual inspection.
Remaining eye blink artifacts were removed by decomposing the EEG data into
independent sources of brain activity using independent component analysis,
and removing eye blink components from the data for each subject individually.
Epochs were low-pass filtered at 30 Hz for visualization purposes.
Data analysis
The small sample size precluded the use of inferential statistics; therefore, data
were analyzed using descriptive statistics and graphic analysis.
Emotion-induced blindnes
Three out of four patients completed the task OFF DBS first. Our dependent
measure is an accuracy measure reflecting the percentage of correctly identified
59
Chapter 3
picture orientation out of all trials (including trials where patients reported
no target). Due to our small sample size, relatively low signal-to-noise due to
overlapping responses to the RSVP stimuli, and the absence of catch trials, we
were unable to compute standard ERPs for this task and only report results of
iEEG time-frequency analyses.
Backward masking
Two out of three patients completed the BM task OFF DBS first. Our two
dependent measures were accuracy (correctly indicating whether the presented
number was smaller or larger than 5) and confidence (whether patients were
sure or unsure about their response).
To extract event-related potential (ERP) markers of information-
processing, we epoched the ERP data to the onset of the mask Del Cul et al
(2007). Next, we subtracted the data from the mask-only SOA condition from
all other SOA conditions. Finally, we shifted ERP onset back to target onset,
to compute target-locked ERPs. Due to the high levels of noise in the data,
we focused solely on graphical analysis of the P3b over central parietal scalp
sites (P1, Pz, P2, PO3, POz, PO4). This scalp site was used to determine the peak
amplitude of this component by averaging the amplitude values 15 ms around
the peak sample between 200-400 ms post-target.
3.4. Results
Emotion-induced blindness
Behavior
As shown in Fig. 3, as typically found (Shapiro et al., 1997), patients showcased
a robust blink: they less often detected the target on Lag2 (M: 59.4%, SD: 6.6%)
compared to Lag8 (M: 68.4%, SD: 10%) distractor-present trials. Moreover, the
blink was larger after a negative versus a neutral distractor. That is, within Lag8
trials, patients performed better on average when presented with a negative
(M: 70.8%, SD: 11.5%) compared to a neutral distractor (M: 65.9%, SD: 10.4%),
while this seeming difference was smaller for Lag2 trials (NEG-M: 60.5%, SD:
7.5%; NEUT-M: 58.4%, SD: 7.9%), resulting in a numerically deeper blink (Lag8-
Lag2) after a negative vs. neutral distractor: the emotion-induced blindness
effect. Notably, in line with our prediction that DBS would reduce the distractor-
induced blink, patients showcased improved accuracy when DBS was ON (M:
63.3%, SD: 6.5%) compared to when stimulation was OFF (M: 55.6%, SD: 4.5%)
in the time window of the blink (Lag2 trials), but this seeming difference
60
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
was reduced outside of the blink window, for Lag8 trials (ON-M: 68.9%, SD:
14.9%; OFF-M: 67.8%, SD: 3.4%). However, this effect did not seem to depend
on distractor valence, as DBS similarly affected target accuracy in negative vs.
neutral trials: In Lag2 trials ON stimulation improved performance for neutral
distractors by 8.5% on average (SD: 13.6%, range: -6% to +26%), and for negative
distractors by 7.1% (SD: 6.3%, range: +1% to +15%). This difference was either
smaller or absent for Lag8 trials: accuracy improved by 3% for neutral (SD:
14.8%, range: -13% to +19%), and decreased by 1% for negative distractors (SD:
10.2%, range: -16% to +7%). In line with our expectations, DBS thus seemed to
selectively improve accuracy on Lag2 trials, but contrary to our expectations,
the valence or saliency of the distractor mattered little.
3
Figure 3. Mean accuracy for Lag across all eight sessions across four patients (top left), split by
Valence (top right), DBS (bottom left), and their interaction (bottom right). Patients showcase a
robust attentional blink on average, seemingly higher accuracy for negative distractors on Lag8
trials, and higher accuracy for DBS ON in Lag2 trials.
61
Chapter 3
iEEG
We attempted to replicate and extend iEEG findings from Slagter et al (2017),
where in a standard AB task, an increase in power in the / range (8-16 Hz) was
present 80-140 ms after T1 (distractor in EIB) in T2 blink compared to no-blink
α β
trials, as well as an increase in the theta range (4-8 Hz) 150-400 ms after T2 was
seen (target in EIB) in contrast with trials where it was unseen. Both expectations
are marked in Fig. 4 with a black box. For neither the left or right striatal electrode
no consistent effect can be seen after target presentation in the theta range in
our data, neither OFF or ON DBS. There seems to be some consistency across
patients for an effect in the / range on the left, but this effect was in the opposite
direction from our prediction, and rather small in amplitude both for DBS OFF
α β
and ON, as can be seen in Figure 5. Thus, with our small number of cases, and a
different blink paradigm, we did not reproduce the iEEG signatures of capture
and conscious perception reported in Slagter et al. (2017).
Figure 4. Time frequency results from the emotion-induced blindness task for seen versus unseen
trials acrosss subjects (top row) and for each individual subject (lower rows). Presented are intra-
cranial EEG data from the left (left figures) and right (right figures) ventral striatum. The target
was presented at time zero. Time-frequency representations show in db the strength of differences
in striatal activity between seen and unseen short-interval trials in the DBS OFF condition. The
black rectangles denote the two time-frequency windows of interest.
62
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
3
Figure 5. Presented is mean power for the predetermined / frequencies for the emotion-induced
blindness task. As can be seen, we did not observe greater activity during DBS OFF in the /
range to distractors in unseen vs. seen trials, in contrast αtoβ Slagter et al. (2017). For DBS ON as
αβ
well, differences seem to deviate from zero only slightly.
Backward masking
Behavior
As can be seen from Figure 6, patient’s accuracy improved with increased
temporal asynchrony between target and mask (SOA), as is typically found (e.g.,
Breitmeyer, 2007). Whereas accuracy was at chance level for a SOA of 16 ms (M:
49.1%, SD: 5.8%), patients performed increasingly well with a SOA of 50 ms (M:
59.6%, SD: 10%) and even better at a SOA of 100 ms (M: 80.6%, SD: 17.4%). DBS
ON improved accuracy for all three SOAs (16 ms M: +7.8%, SD: 5.9%, range: +2.5
to +14.2%; 50 ms M: +4.9%, SD: 8.4%, range: -1% to +14%; 100 ms M: +4%, SD:
10.9%, range: -2.2% to +16.6%). As this improvement was seen for all SOAs,
and largest for the 16ms SOA, it is unclear if this effect reflects a true increase
in accurate conscious perception or rather a response bias. This is unlikely
63
Chapter 3
however given we found little change in confidence scores for low SOAs (see
below).
We observed a similar pattern for response confidence: patients were
increasingly confident in their response with higher SOAs: 16 ms (M: 36%, SD:
48.4%) compared to 50 ms (M: 62%, SD: 28%) and 100 ms (M: 90.1%, SD: 13.2%).
DBS ON also numerically enhanced confidence scores increasingly so for longer
SOA durations: for 16 ms (M: +.8%, SD: 4.2%, range: -2.2% to +5.6%), 50 ms (M:
+2.3%, SD: 9.1%, range: -4.8% to +12.5%) or 100 ms SOA trials (M: +6.2%, SD:
10%, range: -1% to +17.7%).
Figure 6. Mean accuracy and confidence, overall (left plots) and split by DBS conditions (right
plots). Both accuracy and confidence scores improve with increased SOA (left plots; averaged
across DBS OFF and ON). DBS generally enhanced accuracy, across SOA (top right plot), and
confidence scores, in particular for the longer SOA durations (bottom right plot).
EEG
As shown in Fig. 7, we replicated previous reports showing that the target-
evoked P3 ERP components are affected by the duration of target-mask SOA
despite our small sample size (Boonstra et al., 2020; Del Cul et al., 2007).
Specifically, the target-evoked P3 was virtually absent for the 16-ms SOA, in
which targets were typically not seen, but present in all other SOA trials. While
64
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
the amplitude of the P3 did not further scale with longer target-mask SOAs, as
in our previous study (Boonstra et al., 2020), P3 latency seemed to scale with
SOA. This could potentially be explained by a more pronounced preceding N2 in
longer SOA trials (see Fig. 7), which may have temporally overlapped with the
P3. Past work has shown that the N2 is the first ERP component to linearly scale
in amplitude with conscious visibility (Sergent et al., 2005). A roughly similar
pattern of findings could be observed for DBS ON.
3
Figure 7. Effects of SOA and DBS on target-evoked ERPs in the backward masking task. This
figure displays the grand-average target evoked ERPs for P3b electrodes (P1, Pz, P2, PO3, POz,
PO4) for both DBS conditions combined (left panels) and separately (right panels), per target-mask
SOA condition (16, 33, 50, 66, and 100 ms). This figure shows that ERP P3b amplitudes and la-
tencies generally increased as a function of target-mask SOA, although not necessarily linearly
(bottom figures).
iEEG
As in the case of the EIB task, we first tried to replicate the finding from Slagter
et al (2017) concerning a selective theta response (4-8 Hz) between 150-400 ms
to consciously perceived targets. As can be seen from Fig. 8, no such effect can
65
Chapter 3
be shown consistently across participants. Due to a lack of the expected effect
in the OFF condition, time-frequency spectra for the ON condition are omitted.
Figure 8. Time frequency results for seen versus unseen trials in the backward masking task
OFF DBS. Intracranial EEG data are presented from the left (left figures) and right (right figures)
ventral striatum. The target was presented at time zero. Time-frequency representations show
in db the strength of differences in striatal activity between seen and unseen targets for 50 ms
SOA trials with DBS OFF.
3.5. Discussion
In this preliminary study, we presented results showcasing how deep brain
stimulation in the basal ganglia may influence conscious perception. As a
66
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
minimum requirement for the validity of our study, we showed how patients
produced patterns of behavior expected for both emotion-induced blindness
(EIB) and backward masking (BM). In addition, we showed that at a behavioral
level there are indications suggesting that stimulation may improve target
perception accuracy to a small degree in both tasks. Specifically, the emotion-
induced blink was smaller ON DBS, and participants generally perceived more
masked targets. Yet, our neural findings were less clear, conceivably due to
our small sample size and their greater sensitivity to noise. We were able to
largely replicate ERP findings from previous research for the BM task, showing
a general increase in N2 and P3b amplitude and/or latency to consciously
perceived targets as a function of SOA. Yet, we were unable to obtain reliable
ERP responses to targets presented in an RSVP stream for the EIB task. Nor 3
were we able to replicate time-frequency findings from previous research for
either task OFF DBS. Lastly, we failed to show a meaningful effect of DBS on
either ERPs or time-frequency decompositions. Thus, our findings suggest that
ventral striatal DBS may improve conscious perception, but this critically awaits
replication in large sample size studies that can also reveal the underlying
neural mechanisms.
Currently, DBS is thought to affect neural tissue by generating efferent
output at the stimulation frequency in the axon (Brocker & Grill, 2013;
McIntyre et al., 2004). In the case of stimulation of the striatum in OCD patients
specifically, the therapeutic effect of DBS seems to stem from the normalization
of nucleus accumbens hypoactivity, and hyperconnectivity in the frontostriatal
network (Acevedo et al., 2021; Figee et al., 2013; Smolders et al., 2013). More
recently, two bundles of the anterior limb of the internal capsule have come to
the forefront as target for stimulation: the anterior thalamic radiation (ATR) and
the superolateral branch of the medial forebrain bundle (slMFB) (Coenen et al.,
2012). The slMFB connects the prefrontal cortex via the nucleus accumbens to
the ventral tegmental area (VTA), and contains dopaminergic projections from
the VTA to the ventral striatum (Haber & McFarland, 1999). Improvements in
mood are thought to contribute to the improvement of OCD symptoms through
stimulation (Coenen et al., 2017). The ATR connects the prefrontal cortex to the
anterior thalamus and is part of the cortico-striatal-thalamo-cortical network.
Stimulation may normalize the dysregulation of this network in OCD (van den
Heuvel et al., 2016). Stimulation of the slMFB seems most effective in combating
OCD symptoms (Liebrand et al., 2019).
Given these courses of action, it is conceivable that the marginal behavioral
improvements we recorded, stem from a normalized capacity for broadcasting
of task-relevant stimuli, in line with theoretical accounts suggesting that
67
Chapter 3
conscious perception depends information being made globally available
(Crick & Koch, 2003; Dehaene & Changeux, 2011; Edelman, 2003). Indeed, an
explanation of our behavioral findings in these terms would support the
proposed role played by the BG in perceptual processes (Redgrave et al., 1999).
It should be noted however that several limitations pertain to our study. We
tried to replicate findings from a previous iEEG study from our group (Slagter
et al., 2017), showing how a distractor (T1) elicited /early response, possibly
reflecting attentional capture, was associated with failed perception of a
α β
subsequent target (T2), as well as a theta burst only for seen targets (T2). A direct
comparison between this study and the present study is impeded by the fact that
both tasks weren’t identical. While in the study by Slagter and colleagues (2017)
a standard attentional blink task was used, in our study, patients performed an
EIB task containing valenced distractors (equivalent to T1 in the AB task), and
patients did not have to report the distractor. It must be emphasized there was
good reason for this difference in design: we introduced a valenced distractor
to strengthen the presumed attentional capture effect found previously with
a neutral symbol. The idea was that if such a symbol was able to do so, then a
negative image should elicit this capture effect to a greater degree, and we were
interested to see if DBS could reduce this response.
Our sample size was reduced due to unforeseen limitations in DBS battery
life, making it difficult to tell whether we succeeded in distilling signal from
noise in our neural data. We also used a different stimulator than the study
by Slagter and colleagues (2017). The unique advantage of this device is that it
can stimulate and measure simultaneously, but a relative drawback is that the
recording channel is online referenced to the top contact point on the same
electrode through subtraction, which rendered it impossible for us to use the
exact same referencing scheme as in Slagter al. (2017). Different contact points
can show disparate and even opposite levels of activity, which complicates the
comparison of our results with previous findings.
Despite these limitations, to our knowledge this is the first study to present
data from patients performing an EIB and BM task ON and OFF DBS. We have
shown there are indications to believe striatal DBS may improve conscious
perception, but more research is needed to substantiate this claim.
68
Conscious perception and the basal ganglia
3
69
Chapter 4
The dialectics of free energy minimization
Published as:
Boonstra, E. A., & Slagter, H. A. (2019). The dialectics of free energy
minimization. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 13, 42. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnsys.2019.00042
Chapter 4
4.1. Abstract
Karl Friston’s free energy minimization has been received with great
enthusiasm. With good reason: it not only makes the bold claim to a unifying
theory of the brain, but it is presented as an a priori principle applicable to living
systems in general. In this paper, we set out to show how the breadth of scope of
Friston’s framework converges with the dialectics of Georg Hegel. Through an
appeal to the work of Catherine Malabou, we aim to demonstrate how Friston
not only reinvigorates Hegelian dialectics from the perspective of neuroscience,
but that the implicit alignment with Hegel necessitates a reading of free energy
minimization from the perspective of Hegel’s speculative philosophy. It is this
reading that moves beyond the discussion between cognitivism and enactivism
surrounding Friston’s framework; beyond the question whether the organism is
a secluded entity separated from its surroundings, or whether it is a dynamical
system characterized by perpetual openness and mutual exchange. From a
Hegelian perspective, it is the tension between both positions itself that is
operative at the level of the organism; as a contradiction the organism sustains
over the course of its life. Not only does the organism’s secluded existence
depend on a perpetual relation with its surroundings, but the condition for there
to be such a relation is the existence of a secluded entity. We intend to show
how this contradiction – tension internalized – is at the center of Friston’s
anticipatory organism; how it is this contradiction that grounds the perpetual
process of free energy minimization.
72
Dialectics of free energy minimization
4.2. Introduction
This paper moves in the interstices between neuroscience and contemporary
readings of Georg Hegel’s philosophy (Catherine Malabou, Slavoj Žižek). It seeks
to show how Karl Friston’s free energy minimization resuscitates Hegelian
dialectics from the perspective of empirical science. Friston’s approach to
neural functioning has revolutionized our understanding of the brain. From
the perspective of free energy minimization, the brain is no longer conceived
as an organ that merely incorporates influences from outside; instead, the brain
is viewed as an anticipatory structure engaged in the continual process of its
own maintenance and transformation (Friston, 2010). This approach to neural
functioning not only sits well with what we know about the brain’s structure
and functioning in terms of its anatomy and physiology, but the broader scope
of Friston’s framework – as well as the discussions surrounding it – beg for a 4
return to Hegel.
The connection between Hegelian philosophy and neuroscience is not new.
We find an emblematic example of their convergence in Malabou’s book What
Should We Do with Our Brain? from 2004, which revolves around the opposition
between the Hegelian notion of plasticity on the one hand, and neuroplasticity on
the other. Within neuroscience, we speak of neuroplasticity primarily in terms
of the brain’s capacity to undergo change (e.g., Buonomano & Merzenich, 1998;
Feldman, 2009). For example, in terms of synaptic connections strengthening or
weakening dependent on their excitation. This account of plasticity emphasizes
passivity: the degree to which the brain changes in response to influences it
undergoes from outside; it is the brain’s capacity to receive form. Malabou
shows how in Hegel’s work, the notion of plasticity encompasses not only the
designation of passively receiving form, but simultaneously implicates its
obverse: the capacity to produce form (Malabou, 2005). Said differently, plasticity
harbors activity that often gets lost in its neural variant. And yet, advances in
our scientific understanding of neuroplasticity also touch on the activity of
plasticity, by moving beyond the passive association of synapses. For example,
‘homeostatic forms of neural plasticity regulate all the synapses on a neuron in
unison in an orchestrated fashion.’ (Sweatt, 2016: 189). At the network level as
well, sensory and motor systems have the capacity (to some extent) for cortical
remapping in response to disease or stroke, through which some functioning
may be recovered in the aftermath of such events (e.g., Wittenberg, 2010). For
example, ‘[e]vidence in sensory systems was obtained in work on crossmodal
plasticity in which the loss of input to one sensory modality resulted in cortical
reorganization in other sensory systems.’ (Ostry & Gribble, 2016: 118). In both
73
Chapter 4
of these examples, we are dealing with a form of neuroplasticity implicating an
interplay between different levels of organization, where more general levels
of organization (neuron, network) may subsume the behavior of more specific
processes (synapses, brain areas). Once a process operates at a more general
level of organization, it may no longer make sense to insist on reducing its
functioning to more specific levels (Bello-Morales & Delgado-García, 2015). And
yet, reorganization can occur bidirectionally: a change in a specific process (e.g.,
one sensory modality) may give rise to reorganization in general. This kind of
self-relating organizational process is relevant for the present paper, because
both in the case of Hegel and Friston, we are dealing with a bidirectional process
of (active) organization and maintenance at the level of the brain or organism
at large. The challenge at hand is to extend the brain’s organizational capacity
to our most basic understanding of neural functioning, in order to move beyond
a conception of the brain as a passive receiver of influences.
The challenge we face in neuroscience is to provide a formal description
of neural functioning from the standpoint of the brain. This means that our
explanation should take account of the limited access the brain has to its
surroundings, as well as the (computational) constraints the brain is subject to.
As we will see over the course of this paper, Friston’s free energy minimization
is a formal description of neural functioning that adheres to these constraints.
The second advantage of Friston’s approach is that the framework is grounded
in the minimal requirement for the existence and perpetuation of the brain
itself: the imposition and maintenance of a boundary between the organism
(including the brain) on the one hand, and the organism’s surroundings on the
other. The result is that the brain starts to appear not as an organ of infinite
malleability and accommodation; not as a flexible organ where ‘[a]ll that is
solid, melts into air’ (Marx & Engels, 2002: 16). Instead, the brain appears as a
self-organizing system that undergoes change as a way to resist change. Perhaps
surprisingly, it is here where Hegel’s 19th century philosophy and Friston’s free
energy minimization converge.
Indeed, perhaps it is the double meaning of plasticity – the capacity to
receive form, and the capacity to produce form – which is at stake in free energy
minimization. From this perspective, the brain is conceived as an anticipatory
structure that actively models and anticipates its surroundings. An important
implication is that both of plasticity’s capacities are implicated in the same
circular process; namely, in the form of the reception of sensation, and in the
production of sensation through action. Under free energy minimization, the
brain is caught in a perpetual process of self-production, on the basis of which
form is not only received from outside, but is equally produced and maintained
74
Dialectics of free energy minimization
by the anticipatory structure itself. Friston’s framework allows us to see for the
first time the significance of Malabou’s invocation of the Hegelian notion of
plasticity from the standpoint of neuroscience itself. The elucidation of Friston’s
free energy minimization against the backdrop of Malabou’s reading of Hegel
will allow us to mobilize Malabou’s critique within a theoretical framework
that has rapidly gained traction and stature within contemporary neuroscience.
There are two tenets from Malabou’s reading that need to be brought to
light in order to bring out the convergence between Hegel and Friston. First,
the primacy of habit, understood as a reduplication of nature, through which
the organism starts to appear, already in Hegel, as an anticipatory structure.
Second, the processual nature of the formation and maintenance of habit;
a process that is at once plastic and dialectical. What makes the process of
plasticity dialectical is that in it, contradictory moments coincide. The changing
formation of a particular organism simultaneously implicates its deformation. 4
Framed in terms of old and new, the ‘new defines itself in response to what is
already established; at the same time, the established has to reconfigure itself
in response to the new’ (Fisher, 2009: 3). This contradictory process is what
makes the organism (including the brain) dialectical.
But why appeal to Hegel in the first place? Why Hegelian dialectics?
There are two reasons. The first reason is that already in his work we find
the designation of living organisms in terms of differentiating processes
that presuppose the imposition of a boundary. In both the case of Hegel and
Friston, it makes sense to speak of organic life only on account of the existence
of a boundary which constitutes and sustains a separation between inside
and outside. Contemporary readings of Hegel’s work suggest he was the first
to fully anticipate contemporary conceptions of self-organization and self-
production (autopoiesis). Due to the proximity in starting point and scope of
both Hegel’s and Friston’s work, the first question we address is this: is free
energy minimization a formalization of the dialectical process of plasticity,
understood as the capacity both to receive and to produce form?
While Friston’s approach to neural functioning is incredibly attractive, our
wager is that Friston himself (Allen & Friston, 2018), as well as the appropriators
of his framework in terms of cognitivism (Hohwy, 2013, 2016a; Wiese &
Metzinger, 2017), and enactivism (Bruineberg et al., 2016; Clark, 2013, 2016b), do
not do justice to the unsolvable tension at the heart of neural functioning under
free energy minimization: the brain’s anticipations are never “correct”; the
brain necessarily and continuously sustains and attempts to solve the “errors”
of its anticipations. There is no definite solution to this problem: the brain can
75
Chapter 4
only optimize its anticipations and thereby minimize its error. The result is
that under free energy minimization, the brain sustains tension necessarily.
In addition to the brain’s unsolvable tension, the theoretical struggle
surrounding Friston’s framework revolves around the tension between
cognitivism and enactivism; between seclusion and openness (Allen & Friston,
2018; Hohwy, 2016). This tension revolves around the question whether the
brain is secluded from its surroundings, or whether it is better characterized
by openness to these surroundings, as part of a larger brain-body-environment
system. We are not appealing to Hegel merely for historical reasons; the second
reason to appeal to his work is that his philosophy provides us with a way to
move beyond this discussion. How? From a Hegelian perspective, it is not enough
simply to choose either cognitivism or enactivism; seclusion or openness. Or to
insist on finding the right balance between the two. The appeal to Hegel allows
us to see how Friston’s framework reintroduces the old Hegelian theme of a
contradiction constitutive of life; an ‘Unbehagen in der Natur’, or a discontent
in nature (Žižek, 2016: 350-351). The challenge is to show how the unsolvable
minimization problem of Friston’s framework actualizes the tension between
seclusion and openness. Said differently, we have to mobilize this tension at
the level of the organism itself; to the point where it appears as a contradiction
the organism sustains over the course of its life. The second question central to
this paper is thus: can we enact the Hegelian shift from tension to contradiction
with regards to free energy minimization?
The present paper consists of three parts. First, after outlining the
contradictory organism in Hegel, and the dialectical/plastic process of habitual
anticipation as understood by Malabou (Section 2), we will move on to Friston’s
conception of the anticipatory organism, in order to show how Friston’s free
energy minimization converges with Malabou’s reading of Hegel (Section 3).
Finally, we will try to move beyond both Friston and his cognitivist/enactivist
appropriators, by enacting the shift from the organism’s unsolvable tension,
to its constitutive contradiction (Section 4).
4.3. Habitual anticipation, plasticity, dialectics
Science and teleology
The relationship between Hegelian dialectics and Friston’s free energy
minimization touches on a larger discussion surrounding the connections
between self-organization, self-production (autopoiesis), Friston’s framework,
and predictive processing on the one hand, and Kant and Hegel on the other.
The Kantian legacy at work in these notions, and in Friston’s approach to the
76
Dialectics of free energy minimization
brain, has received most attention within philosophy of mind (Hohwy, 2013;
Swanson, 2018; Weber & Varela, 2002; Wiese & Metzinger, 2017). While some
attention has been devoted to the relationship between dialectics in general
and predictive processing (Bolis & Schilbach, 2018), an investigation into
the specifically Hegelian legacy at work in free energy minimization is long
overdue. Especially since the connections between Hegelian dialectics and the
notions of self-organization and autopoiesis are well-established (Michelini,
2012; Michelini et al., 2018).
While Hegel can and should be criticized for relegating empirical science to
something secondary (beneath philosophy), he by no means dismisses empirical
science all together. On the contrary, his Philosophy of Nature is pervaded by the
attempt to do justice to the science of his day: ‘[n]ot only must philosophy be in
agreement with our empirical knowledge of Nature, but the origin and formation
of the Philosophy of Nature presupposes and is conditioned by empirical 4
physics.’ (Hegel, 2004: 6, §246). However, Hegel lived long before the advent
of non-equilibrium thermodynamics and cybernetics. The empirical physics
in his time were Newtonian mechanics and the early days of thermodynamics.
As such, Hegel followed Kant in problematizing the sufficiency of Newtonian
mechanical laws for understanding living organisms (e.g., see Marques & Brito,
2014; Weber & Varela, 2002). In the words of Kant:
‘An organized being is thus not a mere machine, for that has only a motive
power, while the organized being possesses in itself a formative power, and
indeed one that it communicates to the matter, which does not have it (it
organizes the latter): thus it has a self-propagating formative power, which
cannot be explained through the capacity for movement alone (that is,
mechanism).’ (Kant, 2000, 246, §65)
A central issue surrounding the ‘self-propagating formative power’ of
organisms in contrast to Newtonian mechanics, is the problem of teleology,
purpose, or “natural ends” [Naturzweck]. For Kant, a ‘thing exists as a natural
end if it is cause and effect of itself’ (Kant, 2000, 243, §64). More precisely:
‘[a]n organized product of nature is that in which everything is an end and
reciprocally a means’ (Kant, 2000, 247, §66). In other words, the question
of purposiveness in nature pertains to the way organisms exert purpose in
the conservation and perpetuation of their own organization. Hegel upheld
Kant’s opposition between Newtonian mechanism and organism, as well as
the problem of natural ends. However, when we speak of purpose, we need to
distinguish between external and internal purposiveness:
‘[t]he notion of end, however, is not merely external to Nature, as it is, for
example, when I say that the wool of the sheep is there only to provide me with
77
Chapter 4
clothes; for this often results in trivial reflections, […], where God’s wisdom is
admired in that He provided cork-trees for bottle-stoppers, or herbs for curing
disordered stomachs, and cinnabar for cosmetics.’ (Hegel, 2004: 5, §245)
When Hegel speaks of internal purposiveness and the notion of end, he
refers to a logic that pertains to the organization of natural objects:
‘[t]he notion of end as immanent to natural objects is their simple
determinateness, e.g. the seed of a plant, which contains the real possibility
of all that is to exist in the tree, and thus, as a purposive activity is directed
solely at self-preservation. […]; the true teleological method – and this is the
highest – consists, therefore, in the method of regarding Nature as free in her
own peculiar vital activity.’ (Hegel, 2004: 6, §245)
Purposive activity stems not from the projection of intentions, goals,
or plans onto the organism. Instead, the organism’s internal purposiveness
is grounded in the immanent necessity of self-maintenance: internal
purposiveness is self-preservation. The specifically Hegelian twist to the
Kantian problem of “natural ends” resides in the assertion of purposiveness
immanent to nature. For Kant, purpose remains ultimately at the level of
knowledge and explanation; it is ‘not an objective principle but a merely
regulative one, a subjective maxim of the reflecting power of judgment.
Therefore it has a value that is not constitutive but simply heuristic.’ (Michelini,
2012: 135). For this reason, from the perspective of Kantian philosophy, we can
only conceive of purposiveness “as if” it pertains to nature.
Incidentally, the opposition between external and internal purposiveness
is central to Friston’s free energy minimization as well. His framework provides
an alternative to normative explanations ‘in which I, as external observer,
write down some condition for optimal behavior, rather than grounding that
explanation in the necessary preconditions for the existence for that organism.’
(Allen & Friston, 2018: 2473). By taking the preconditions of the organism as a
starting point, ‘the FEP [free energy principle] provides a normative, teleological
essence to the synthesis of biology and information’ (Allen & Friston, 2018:
2476). In other words, in the case of Friston as well, the organism’s internal
purposiveness (‘teleological essence’) follows from the necessary condition
that has to be met for there to be an organism.
Both in the case of Friston and Hegel, such a necessary precondition is the
existence of a boundary between the organism and its surroundings: ‘the events
that ‘take place within the spatial boundary of a living organism’ [Schrödinger]
may arise from the very existence of a boundary or blanket, which itself is
inevitable in a physically lawful world.’ (Friston, 2013: 1). In Hegel’s words:
‘Nature’s formations are determinate [bestimmt], bounded [beschränkt], and as
78
Dialectics of free energy minimization
such enter into existence.’ (Hegel, 2004: 284, §339). In other words, natural
objects are to be bounded if they are to exist. As we will see in the next section,
the gist of Friston’s framework is that if an organism maintains a boundary, it
minimizes free energy.
In the case of Hegel and his discussion of internal purposiveness, it is not
enough to assert the importance of the existence of a boundary. If we were to
leave it at that we would remain at a determination of the organism in terms
of a bounded organization plus the magical power to exert purpose. There is
no such “plus” in Hegel; he does not “add something” to mechanical nature;
he does not succumb to vitalism. Instead of an addition, Hegel’s solution to the
problem of purposiveness consists in subtraction. As we will see below, it is
what the organism lacks which gives it purpose or drive. By addressing what
it lacks, the organism exerts purpose in the preservation of its organization.
There is nothing mysterious about the notion of lack. If we regard an organism 4
as an organized product of nature, then lack is simply a state of disorganization
that needs to be addressed (e.g., hunger). Here too, there are striking parallels to
Friston’s framework in which the organism continually engages in minimizing
the “error” inherent to its internal states, in an attempt to maintain an internal
organization.
What makes the organism contradictory is the coincidence of organization
and disorganization. ‘For Hegel, life itself is imbued with contradiction because
it is inextricably bound up with what it lacks: its identity is at one with its
negation.’ (Michelini, 2012: 133). Hegel’s version of self-organization and self-
production is thus a continuous process of self-preservation sustained by
contradiction, through which a bounded organization is maintained. In the
remainder of this section we will retrace Hegel’s exposition, which results in
the contradictory organism.1
1 There is much debate about what contradiction means in Hegel’s philosophy (e.g., see
Bole, 1987; Bordignon, 2017). While we may define contradiction as a pair of sentences,
where one negates the other, it is important to emphasize that we are concerned not
solely with epistemological contradiction. In Hegel’s words, this means letting go of
‘a tenderness for the things of this world’ (Hegel, 2004: 5, §245), in order to assert
the stain of contradiction at the level of things themselves. Over the course of this
paper, we follow Žižek in the search for ‘‘contradiction’ [inconsistency, impossibility,
antagonism] as an internal condition of every identity.’ (Žižek, 1989: xxix). In our case,
this search pertains to the living organism under free energy minimization.
79
Chapter 4
Animal organism
The entirety of Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature forms a succession of stages that
progresses from mechanics to organics, culminating in the animal organism.
For our purposes, his discussion of the animal organism is particularly relevant,
due to its striking similarity with Friston’s free energy minimization. As such,
we will focus on Hegel’s discussion of the animal organism:
‘The animal organism is the microcosm, the centre of Nature which
has achieved an existence for itself in which the whole of inorganic Nature
is recapitulated [zusammengefaßt] and idealized; this will be worked out in
the detailed exposition to follow. Since the animal organism is the process of
subjectivity, of self-relation in an outer world [der Äußerlichkeit], the rest of
Nature is therefore here present for the first time as outward, since the animal
preserves itself in this relation with the outer world [zum Äußeren].’ (Hegel,
2004: 356, §352)
Almost everything we want to discuss in this section is contained in this
passage. Let us unpack it. The advent of living beings for Hegel designates the
moment where a natural process has extracted itself from the rest of nature and
starts to function on its own terms. What gives animal life a privileged status
is that the animal organism maintains a more determinate boundary with its
surroundings compared to plant life: ‘[n]ow the plant is drawn towards the outer
world but without truly preserving itself in connection with what is other, and
consequently the rest of Nature is still not present for it as outer.’ (Hegel, 2004:
356, §352). While a strong division between plant and animal life is problematic
from the standpoint of modern biology (let alone the omission of other forms of
life such as single-celled organisms), we are concerned with a simple point that
Hegel places great emphasis on: plant life is not separated from its surroundings
to the degree that animals are. ‘The plant, as the first self-subsistent subject
[…] still has its origin in immediacy’ (Hegel, 2004: 304, §343). Put simply, this
means that the plant cannot ‘freely determine its place, i.e. move from the spot’,
and that ‘its nutrition is not an interrupted process but a continuous flow’
(Hegel, 2004: 305, §344). This changes with animal life, because ‘the animal is
a true, self-subsistent self which has attained to individuality, it excludes and
separates itself from the universal substance of the earth which is for it an outer
existence.‘ (Hegel, 2004: 355, §351). The animal maintains delineated break with
its surroundings. While plant life ‘still has its origin in immediacy’, the animal
organism has suspended the immediacy of its surroundings.
In the maintenance of itself as a distinct entity (‘for itself’), the animal
forms a recapitulation and “idealization” of inorganic nature. “Idealization”
is what Malabou translates as “contraction”; around which Hegel’s entire
80
Dialectics of free energy minimization
Philosophy of Nature is organized: ‘Hegel intends to show how the living
organism summarizes everything that precedes it: inert matter, the elements,
chemical processes, all the constitutive moments which are dialectically
conjoined’ (Malabou, 2005: 59). But the process of contraction goes further. As
we will see further on, contraction designates the process through which the
organism reproduces its constitution, in the broadest possible sense. The name
for this constitution is habit.
In the suspension of immediacy; in the maintenance of a boundary, the
animal organism has replaced natural immediacy with a second immediacy
that is posited by the organism itself. This substitution is the ‘characteristic
of habit’, through which nature is redoubled and as such starts to appear as
‘second nature’ (Malabou, 2005: 37-38). The living organism, and the animal
in particular maintains a minimal difference between itself and its immediate
surroundings. In the maintenance of this difference, the animal perpetuates 4
itself as a habitual structure. The structural elements that constitute the animal
organism – through which it contracts habit – are what Hegel calls ‘Shape [die
Gestalt]’ and ‘assimilation [die Assimilation]’ (Hegel, 2004: 356, §352).
The animal organism’s shape [Gestalt] is in turn comprised of three
constitutive moments: 1) ‘its simple, universal being-within-self in its externality
[allgemeines Insichsein in seiner Äußerlichkeit]’; ‘it is an undivided identity of the
subject with itself – sensibility’, 2) ‘a capacity for being stimulated from outside
and the subject’s own reaction outwards to the stimulation – irritability’, and 3)
‘the unity of these moments, the negative return to itself from its relation with
the outside world, and, through this, the production [Erzeugung] and positing
[Setzen] of itself as a singular – reproduction, which is the reality and the basis
of the first two moments.’ (Hegel, 2004: 357, §353; see Michelini, 2012; Michelini
et al., 2018, Fig. 1, for a full schematic overview of the animal organism in
Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature).
As is characteristic of Hegel’s philosophical exposition, these three
moments can be regarded separately, in which case they remain abstract, but
only when considered together as a single movement do they do justice to the
totality of the process constituting the animal organism:
‘Reproduction passes through sensibility and irritability and absorbs them;
it is thus derived, posited universality which, however, as self-producing [das
Sichproduzieren], is at the same time concrete singularity. It is reproduction
which is first the whole – the immediate unity-with-self in which the whole has
at the same time entered into relationship with itself.’ (Hegel, 2004: 358, §353)
In other words, reproduction here does not refer to replication, but to ‘self-
production, or the active conservation of a self-produced identity’ (Marques
81
Chapter 4
& Brito, 2014: 92). The totality of the movement of reproduction includes
sensibility and irritability. Let us start with sensibility, which designates the
identity of the animal organism with itself: the ‘the sentient creature [das
Empfindende]’ (Hegel, 2004: 358, §354). When considered in isolation, the ‘system
of sensibility’ is constituted by ‘the extreme of abstract self-reference’ (Hegel,
2004: 357, §354), which simply designates the rudimentary differentiation of
the animal with regards to its immediate surroundings, whereby it maintains
a minimum of autonomy.
However, the animal not only exists in isolation: the system of sensibility
is differentiated outwards through the nervous system, on account of which the
animal has ‘an inward and outward reference – the sensory and motor nerves
respectively’ (Hegel, 2004: 359, §354). Indeed, it is through the nervous system
that the animal is sensitive to (outside) influences:
‘The moment of difference in sensibility is the nervous system which
is directed outwards and is involved in external relationships: sensation
[Empfindung] as determinate – either as immediately posited from outside or
as self-determination [Fühlen oder Selbstbestimmung]. The motor nerves mostly
start from the spinal cord, and the sensory nerves from the brain: the former
are the nervous system in its practical function, the latter are that system as
receptive of determinations, and to this the sensory organs belong.’ (Hegel,
2004: 363, §354)
The first thing to note in this passage is that Hegel introduces a rudimentary
circular process (‘self-determination’) through which the organism can
determine its own sensations on the basis of its motions. In the next section,
we will see that such circularity is crucial within Friston’s free energy
minimization. The second thing to note is that, as the animal is ‘receptive to
determinations’, it not only maintains a break with its surroundings, but it also
maintains a break with itself. As the animal ‘enters into relationship with itself’,
the animal ‘has itself for its object’ (Hegel, 2004: 353, §351). This self-relation,
self-differentiation, or self-feeling is sensation, which is the ‘absolutely
characteristic feature [Bestimmung] of the animal.’ (Ibid.). As we will see later
on, free energy minimization also functions on the basis of the incorporation
of sensation or differentiation, in the form of anticipatory “error”.
The movement of self-determination not only pertains to differentiation
inwards; the animal also differentiates itself outwards: ‘the subjectivity of
the animal is not simply distinguished from external Nature, but the animal
distinguishes itself from it; and this is an extremely important distinction, this
positing of itself [Sichsetzen] as the pure negativity of this place, and this place,
and so on.’ (Hegel, 2004: 354, §351). Which brings us to the second moment:
82
Dialectics of free energy minimization
‘irritability is just as much a capacity for being stimulated by an other and
the reaction of self-maintenance against it, as it is also, conversely, an active
maintenance of self’ (Hegel, 2004: 359, §354). In other words, building on top
of the capacity for self-differentiation or sensation, irritability designates the
organism’s capacity to react to, or act on, its sensations. In the combination
of the self-determining loop of sensibility, and the capacity to react and
maintain itself in irritability; we have the necessary ingredients to complete the
overarching loop that constitutes the third moment: reproduction. In passing
through both sensibility and irritability, the animal continually (re-)produces
and maintains itself as a distinct entity. Let us continue to how the totality of
this movement operates in the next stage Hegel distinguishes.
The organism’s reproductive movement actualizes in relation to its
surroundings, through which the organism appropriates these surroundings:
‘Now since the organism is directed towards the outer world as well as 4
being inwardly in a state of tension towards it [innerlich dagegen spannt], we
have the contradiction of a relationship in which the outer must be sublated
[aufgehoben]. The organism must therefore posit what is external as subjective
[das Äußerliche als subjektiv setzen], appropriate it, and identify it with itself; and
this is assimilation.’ (Hegel, 2004: 381, §357)
In other words, as the animal necessarily stands in relation to its
surroundings; its reproduction takes the form of perpetual activity, through
which the animal assimilates nature external to itself. The animal’s relation to
food makes up the most elementary example of this process. As the organism
strives to overcome the deficiency of hunger, it passes through the three stages
of sensibility, irritability, and reproduction in the corresponding sequence of
hunger, ingestion, and digestion (Michelini, 2012; Michelini et al., 2018: 8). As
such, the organism reproduces itself through the ingestion and subsequent
digestion of food.
The animal’s capacity for sensation permits the experience of tension:
the ‘self-feeling of the individuality is also directly exclusive and in a state of
tension with a non-organic nature which stands over against it as its external
condition and material.’ (Hegel, 2004: 380, §357). And while this material may be
employed to alleviate states of lack or deficiency such as hunger, the overcoming
of deficiency offers only temporary respite: ‘the animal perpetually returns
from its satisfaction to a state of need.’ (Hegel, 2004: 391, §362). In other words,
the animal only temporarily overcomes its deficiency and necessarily revisits
and maintains a state of tension with its surroundings.
While hunger is the most readily available example of this process, the
simplicity of the example should not deceive us: its basic logic is ‘particularized
83
Chapter 4
in an infinite variety of ways’ (Hegel, 2004: 388, §360). While the example of
hunger is intuitive, it does not go far enough, because in order to speak of
plasticity in terms of simultaneous reception and production of form, we need
a process that not only alleviates states of need, but we need a process able to
reconfigure the organism’s habitual structure itself. Indeed, the generalized
logic of “digestion” is what we are dealing with in the process of assimilation,
where the animal contracts and posits its surroundings as part of its own
habitual structure. The result of this continuous abstraction-contraction-
recapitulation is ‘literally, habitus, at once the internal disposition and the
general constitution of the organism’ (Malabou, 2005: 59). The “general
constitution” of the organism refers to the recapitulation of inorganic nature
that came before it, while the organism’s “internal disposition” signifies
the organism’s contracted habitual structure. As we will see later on, it is the
generalized logic of perpetual contraction that we find in Friston’s free energy
minimization, in the sense that the configuration of an anticipatory model
“feeds off” its surroundings.
Contradiction and anticipation
We began with the organism understood as a self-enclosed entity; an abstract
‘system of sensibility’ which is subsequently differentiated outwards on account
of the nervous system. In the second moment of irritability, the organism is not
only receptive to stimulation, but reacts to such stimulation by engaging in
active self-maintenance. Through these moments of sensibility and irritability,
the organism embodies a self-productive loop in which its surroundings are
assimilated. With these two stages of shape [Gestalt] and assimilation, we passed
from an abstract to a relational understanding of the organism. We now have
the necessary ingredients to take the third and final step in order to show what
makes the organism contradictory.
If we emphasize the organism’s autonomy, the problem is that the
relation of the organism to what lies outside it remains an external relation.
Its conception remains abstract; as if the organism has a choice to engage or
not with its surroundings. If we take a step further, we are forced to admit that
the organism “always already” stands in relation to its surroundings, as it is
internally strung in opposition to it. However, if we emphasize the organism’s
perpetual relationship to its surroundings, we risk losing the very condition
for its existence as a distinct entity: the boundary between organism and
surroundings. The difficulty resides in conceiving of the organism as both
abstract and relational. More precisely, the point is not to choose either an
abstract or a relational conception of the organism. Rather, the point is to
84
Dialectics of free energy minimization
see how the organism’s relation to and dependence on its surroundings is
simultaneously constitutive for the organism understood as a distinct or an
“abstract” entity. Therein resides the organism’s contradiction:
‘Although common thought has it that need indicates dependence on
something else, in reality, in a paradoxical way, it is a manifestation of
independence: in fact water and food would be totally indifferent to the living
being and they would not be able to have a ‘positive’ relation with it if the living
being was not, for Hegel, ‘the possibility of this relation’.’ (Michelini, 2012: 137)
Said differently, the paradox is that the organism’s relation to something
outside itself is simultaneously the guarantor for the minimum of its autonomy.
There is no choice to be made here between abstract and relational: the organism
itself is subject to the tension between independence and dependence in the
perpetuation of its life. For there to be a relationship of dependence between
organism and surroundings, there needs to be an independent organism in the 4
first place, in the sense of a distinct entity that is able to engage in a relationship
of dependence. We can also turn this around: the only way for the organism
to conserve and perpetuate itself as an independent entity, is to engage in a
continuous relationship of dependence with its surroundings, through which
the organism assimilates external nature. This relationship of dependence in
turn is continually reinvigorated by the organism’s recurring state of need. In
this sense, the tension between independence and dependence is operative at
the level of the organism itself. Insofar as the organism maintains a boundary
between itself and its surroundings, it perpetually revisits a state of tension in
need of alleviation. As such, sustained tension is concomitant with the existence
of a boundary. As we will see below, this tension internal to the organism’s
organization is the sustained contradiction which serves as a precondition for
the organism’s existence concurrent with the boundary that constitutes its life.
With the organism’s constitutive contradiction, we return to the problem of
internal purposiveness from the start of this section. For Hegel, the organism’s
loop of self-determination is sustained by the contradiction it sustains, which
gives the organism its internal purposiveness: ‘[n]eed and drive are the readiest
examples of [internal] purpose. They are the felt contradiction, as it occurs
within the living subject itself; and they lead into the activity of negating this
negation […].’ (Hegel, 2004: 281, §204). The living organism (subject) feels
contradiction, and its activity is directed towards overcoming this contradiction
by getting rid of (negating) the feeling of need: the process begins with ‘the
feeling of lack [Mangel], and the urge [Trieb] to get rid of it [ihn aufzuheben]’
(Hegel, 2004: 385, §359). But because the organism’s contradiction is constitutive
for its existence, there is no definite escape from it as long as the organism
85
Chapter 4
is alive: ‘[t]his contradiction, that they are and are not, […], manifests itself
as a perpetual process’ (Hegel, 2004: 6377, §356). In its perpetual attempts at
overcoming its needs, the animal engages in ‘activity of deficiency’ (Michelini,
2012: 137).
Therein resides the paradoxical status of living beings: the organism
harbors at once the maintenance of its own identity, as well as the negation of
this identity. ‘The defect [Mangel] in a chair which has only three legs is in us’
(Hegel, 2004: 387, §359). The organism functions like a three-legged chair that
stays upright, but continually slants into the direction of its missing fourth leg.
As Francisco Varela put it: ‘If we invert our perspective, this constant bringing
forth of signification is what we may describe as a permanent lack in the living:
it is constantly bringing forth a signification that is missing, not pregiven or
pre-existent.’ (Varela, 1997). In the continuous attempts at suspending its
needs, the organism reproduces itself by contracting its surroundings. It is in
this sense that the organism organizes itself around the contradiction that
constitutes its existence. Insofar as this organization endures, the name for
this organization is habit. As we will see later on (Section 4.3), in mobilizing
this contradiction immanent to the organism, Hegel anticipated contemporary
discussions surrounding the appropriation of Friston’s framework in terms of
cognitivism and enactivism.
What makes Hegel’s philosophy difficult to follow is that he forces us to
retrace numerous processes separately that he subsequently ties in together.
What makes it outright frustrating is that the tension within the exposition
itself is transposed into the object under study. The result is that by the end of
the exposition, our initial starting point has been problematized. This is what
Helmholtz missed when he dismissed Hegel for starting with the ‘hypothesis
of Identity’ (Helmholtz, 1995: 79). In our case, the abstract conception of the
animal organism as a self-enclosed entity is transformed through a relational
designation, into an entity that appears as inherently contradictory. In this
sense, the same circular structure of the organism’s self-production also
pertains to Hegel’s philosophy itself. His philosophical exposition takes the
form of a circular process, which, at the end of the circle, has retroactively
undermined its own starting point. Again, in the case of the organism, the
point is not to exchange an abstract conception for a relational one, from
where the organism is engaged in continuous exchange with its surroundings.
The organism is both abstracted from its surroundings as it maintains its
boundary, and it stands in constant relation to these surroundings. The point is
to recognize that the tension between abstract and relational is actualized and
operative at the level of the animal organism itself in the form of recurring lack.
86
Dialectics of free energy minimization
It is this contradiction between habitual structure and lack, or organization and
disorganization, which gives rise to the organism’s internal purpose or drive.
Hegel’s animal organism thereby goes beyond (Newtonian) mechanism
under immediate influence of external nature: the ‘organism is no longer
“determined by external causes” but irritated by external forces.’ (Marques,
2016: 128). The suspension of the immediacy of external nature functions on
the basis of the boundary that separates the organism’s “second nature” or
habit. It is on account of the animal’s contracted habitual structure and the
deficiencies that mark this structure, that the animal operates on the basis of
its own purposiveness: it ‘is only as this self-reproductive being, […], that the
living creature is and preserves itself; it only is, in making itself what it is, and
is the antecedent End which is itself only result.’ (Hegel, 2004: 356, §352). How
does the contraction of habit relate to the notions of plasticity and dialectics?
Both notions designate not a property or attribute of the living organism, 4
but they are two ways of approaching the living organism as a process. This is
crucial, because for Hegel, ‘[s]tructure, as alive, is essentially process’ (Hegel,
2004: 377, §356). As we briefly stated in the introduction, plasticity in Hegel
designates ‘a capacity to receive form and a capacity to produce form’ (Malabou,
2005: 9). The process we have been describing so far is plastic: in the contraction
of its surroundings, the organism is not only formed by its surroundings, but
it produces its own form in the process. The moment forces external to the
organism cross over onto the terrain of the organism, the organism posits and
molds external nature as part of itself.
The process of plasticity is simultaneously dialectical, because the
operations which constitute it, ‘the seizure of form and the annihilation of
all form, emergence and explosion, are contradictory’ (Malabou, 2005: 12).2
The formation of habit does not pertain to a stable entity to which habits are
added and subtracted like attributes. The formation of habit is the formation
of the organism as such: ‘[h]abit is there not only as a particular momentary
satisfaction; rather I am this habit. It is my universal mode of being—what I am
is the totality of my habits. I can do nothing else, I am this.’ (Hegel, 2007: 153).
2 In classical logic, the principle of explosion is often expressed as ex contradictione
quodlibet sequitur [from contradiction, anything follows] (e.g., see Lopez-Astorga,
2016). In Malabou’s work, “explosion” pertains to plasticity as ‘the capacity to an-
nihilate the very form it is able to receive or create.’ For example, the French ‘plas-
tique, […], is an explosive substance’ (Malabou, 2008: 5). In this sense, while plasticity
enables a structure of anticipation, it simultaneously upholds the possibility of this
structure to deform itself, as well as radical openness towards the future.
87
Chapter 4
It is because habit constitutes the organism that every change to its formation
implies a simultaneous deformation. This coincidence of contradictory
moments is what makes the process of plasticity, the contraction of habit and
the perpetual reproduction of the organism, dialectical.
It is also the process of plasticity which makes the animal anticipatory:
‘[n]eed, appetite, desire, the accumulation of such retentions and expectations,
are themselves proof of the fact that the animal is concerned to ensure the
perpetuation of its own life’ (Malabou, 2005: 64). In the reproduction of
itself, the animal not only maintains a relation to itself and its surroundings,
but it also stands in relation to its future: ‘it is the structure of anticipation
through which subjectivity projects itself in advance of itself, and thereby
participates in the process of its own determination’ (Malabou, 2005: 18). The
perpetual reappearance of need and the drive to overcome need, indicate the
animal’s anticipatory disposition. More precisely, they indicate that the animal
itself is simultaneously a rudimentary structure and process of anticipation.
In the perpetual process of its own restructuring, the animal posits the
presuppositions of its own anticipations. Hegel and Friston share the same
starting point: a boundary between organism and surroundings, but can we
conceive of Friston’s anticipatory brain as a process that is at once plastic and
dialectical?
4.4. States of anticipation
Anticipatory brain
The breakthrough of Friston’s free energy minimization stems from the
unconventional answer it provides to a simple question: what does the brain
do? From the perspective of Friston’s framework, neural functioning is
subordinated to the overall imperative of an organism to maintain a boundary
(Allen & Friston, 2018; Ramstead et al., 2018). In the process of boundary-
maintenance, the brain is caught in a continuous process of anticipation in
terms of both perception and action. It is this approach to the brain that has
been well received in philosophy of mind (Bruineberg et al., 2016; Clark, 2013,
2016b; Hohwy, 2013, 2016a; Wiese & Metzinger, 2017). The conception of the brain
as an anticipatory or predictive structure forms the first substantial challenge
within neuroscience to the conception of the brain in terms of the “computer
metaphor”. In the traditional view, we approach the brain as a computer that
primarily processes information from outside; similar to the way data is fed into
a computer, which is subsequently processed and potentially retained for later
use. While such bottom-up, stimulus-driven processing undoubtedly makes up
88
Dialectics of free energy minimization
an important part of what the brain does, anticipatory accounts suggest that
the importance of such bottom-up processing has been overstated. From the
perspective of these accounts, a (matured) brain is engaged to a much greater
degree in the prediction or anticipation of its input. Instead of processing
influences from outside, the brain first and foremost constitutes its reality
on the basis of what it learned to expect, onto which influences from outside
intrude.
It is not the case that the anticipatory perspective introduces top-down
influences into the way we view the brain. The traditional view also assigned
importance to top-down influences in the form of memory, cognitive control,
attention etc. In the traditional view however, such top-down processes
remained secondary in dealing with influences from outside. From the
anticipatory perspective, external influences become secondary to anticipatory
states. What is so radical about this conception is that it turns the traditional 4
view of neural functioning on its head: external influences get caught up in the
primary process of the brain’s anticipatory activity. As we will see below, the
brain’s main locus of activity becomes the minimization of the errors stemming
from its own anticipations, through which it iteratively settles on anticipations
of the future. The brain’s imperative becomes to explain away the mismatch
(prediction error) between its anticipations (top-down) and its actual input
(bottom-up), across the cortical hierarchy. This mismatch in turn serves as
a driver for change in the structure that generates future anticipations. It is
important to emphasize that such anticipations do not pertain to perception
alone. The perceptual aspect of anticipation stands in service of action. In
addition, the input that potentially perturbs the brain’s anticipations is not only
passively received from outside, but can equally be elicited by the structure’s
own actions (Adams et al., 2013). That is, through action, the brain can actively
change its outer world into a state the brain itself anticipated; minimizing
prediction error in the process.
An important advantage of Friston’s framework is that it stays close to
the anatomical and physiological organization of the brain. For example, the
primacy of top-down predictions over bottom-up input fits well with findings
showing that top-down connections are both more divergent and abundant
than bottom-up connections (Friston, 2005). In addition, the framework is
able to adhere to the local computational constraints that individual neurons
are subject to (Bogacz, 2017). The criticism that free energy minimization is
unfalsifiable misses the point: Friston’s framework does not stand in contrast
to traditional neuroscience at the level of testable theories; it is opposed to
89
Chapter 4
traditional neuroscience precisely at the level where traditional neuroscience
itself is unfalsifiable. As in the case of the computer metaphor.
The opposition between anticipatory accounts and traditional neuroscience
touches on two problems discussed earlier: how to do justice to the active
organizational capacity that pertains to the brain’s plasticity? And how to
conceive of the ‘self-propagating formative power’ that pertains to living
organisms? In answering these questions, a simple action-reaction (or
stimulus-response) account seems inadequate, but we simultaneously need to
avoid adding external purpose to mechanical nature. The often-employed way
out of this deadlock in biology is to approach living organisms as dynamical
systems (Ashby, 1966; Bertalanffy, 1950; Lewontin & Levins, 2007; Maturana
& Varela, 2012). From the perspective of these approaches, living organisms
are conceived as systems that maintain themselves through a process of self-
organization and self-production (autopoiesis). It is such a process that Friston
formalizes with free energy minimization, which attempts to capture brain
function in the broadest possible sense. In the remainder of this section, we will
attempt to elucidate Friston’s framework (Section 4.2), in order to bring out its
convergence with Malabou’s reading of Hegel (Section 4.3).
Free energy minimization
Free energy minimization is so broad in fact, that it does not pertain solely to
brain function; it is a framework pertaining to living systems as such. For this
reason, Friston not only reopens the question “what does the brain do?”, but the
same goes for the even broader question: what is life? The specific organization
of the brain is not primary, but rather ‘the consequence of, or requirement for,
this fundamental imperative [of free energy minimization]’ (Friston, 2013a). As
such, we will speak primarily of the organism from here on out, which subsumes
the anticipatory brain. Friston suggests
‘that biological self-organization is not as remarkable as one might
think—and is (almost) inevitable, given local interactions between the states
of coupled dynamical systems. In brief, the events that ‘take place within the
spatial boundary of a living organism’ may arise from the very existence of a
boundary or blanket, which itself is inevitable in a physically lawful world.’
(Friston, 2013b)
In order to make sense of Friston’s framework, we have to adopt the
language of statistical physics. This means that we approach the organism
as a system that stands in relation to its local surroundings or environment.
Because the system is always already embedded in this relation, it necessarily
lacks a complete overview of both its own possible states, as well as the possible
90
Dialectics of free energy minimization
states of its local surroundings. Free energy minimization comes down to a
computational problem in which the organism attempts to minimize the
mismatch between its internal states on the one hand and the (inferred) external
states of its surroundings on the other. What is a state? ‘Formally speaking, the
state of a system corresponds to its coordinates in the space of possible states,
with different axes for different variables […].’ (Friston, 2018a). Put simply, a
multitude of states forms the structural configuration of the organism: ‘the
repertoire of physiological and sensory states in which an organism can be is
limited, and these states define the organism’s phenotype’ (Friston, 2010: 127).
With the notion of “state” we touch on a common thread with regards to
Hegel. Hegel’s notion of “habit” stems from his reading of Aristotle’s De Anima.
The etymology of the word ‘habit’ leads back to the Latin habere: “a way of
having”, and the Greek verb . ‘This verb means ‘to have’, but as soon as it is
ἔχειν
followed by an adverb, it changes its meaning to include ‘the state of being in one 4
way or another’ (Malabou, 2005: 37; italics ours). We thus find here an additional
indication that both lines of thinking are closer than they may appear: both
“state” and “habit” refer to the configuration of the anticipatory organism.
The internal states of the system and the external states of its surroundings
are separated by the organism’s intermediary layer comprised of sensory and
action states. For the organism, the problem of maintaining itself consists in
coordinating the (dis)concordance between different kinds of states. From
a perspective outside the system, the difficulty in understanding how the
coordination of these states unfolds, resides in that we are dealing with a
circular structure, where each kind of state presupposes another. A sensory
state presupposes the evocation of said state, either from outside, or by the
organism itself. If the organism acted on its own sensory states, such action
presupposes an anticipation on the basis of which to act. Such an anticipation in
turn require internal states on the basis of which to anticipate. And finally, the
existence of an internal organization necessitates the existence of a delineated
organism in the first place. We are thus dealing with a loop in which internal
states, action states, external states, and sensory states mutually implicate
each other. In other words, the existence of a boundary between organism
and surroundings is a necessary precondition for the process to take place;
the boundary itself ‘induces a circular causality’ (Allen & Friston, 2018: 2474).
The proximity to Hegel is clear. In his work as well, the discussion of the
animal organism presupposed differentiation: a bounded organization that
sustains a break with external nature. Insofar as the animal organism is alive
it upholds a minimum of autonomy by maintaining a boundary between itself
and its surroundings. In addition, animal life for Hegel is also caught in a
91
Chapter 4
loop of sensation and motion, which gives the organism the capacity for self-
determination. In the case of Friston, the idea is that if a separation between
internal and external states exists, then the system must minimize free energy.
Why?
The logic is as follows: out of all possible states the system can be In,
there is a relatively small number of states that sustain its life. This implies
that, if an organism endures, it will necessarily frequent a limited number of
states that lie within its physiological bounds. The maintenance of a limited
number of states implies that the system will need to try to minimize surprise
with regards to its own states. For example, ‘‘a fish out of water’ would be in a
surprising state (both emotionally and mathematically).’ (Friston, 2010: 127).
Under the assumption that the system limits its own states, ‘the long-term
average of surprise is entropy. This means that minimizing free energy –
through selectively sampling sensory input – places an upper bound on the
entropy or dispersion of sensory states’ (Friston, 2012: 2). The maintenance of
such a limited number of states designates the way biological systems resist
‘the dispersive effects of fluctuations in their environment’ (Friston, 2012: 1).
In other words, the minimization of free energy designates how an organism
resists its surroundings and thereby maintains an internal organization.
The placement of an upper bound on surprise simultaneously implies its
obverse; namely, ‘systems that minimize free energy also maximize a lower
bound on the evidence for an implicit model of how their sensory samples were
generated’ (Friston, 2012: 2). This ‘implicit model’ is the anticipatory structure
generating the organism’s anticipations. Such a generative model ‘aims to
capture the statistical structure of some set of observed inputs by tracking (one
might say, by schematically recapitulating) the causal matrix responsible for
that very structure’ (Clark, 2013: 2). Taken together, free energy minimization
implies that the system limits the states it frequents (by placing an upper bound
on the surprise of these states), and thereby maximizes the evidence for the
‘implicit model’ that it is. As in the case of Hegel, this model is constituted
in a continuous process of contracting (schematically recapitulating) the
organism’s surroundings.
But what is free energy? What does the organism minimize exactly? Friston
says:
‘Free-energy is an information theory quantity that bounds the evidence
for a model of data. Here, the data are sensory inputs and the model is
encoded by the brain. More precisely, free-energy is greater than the
negative log-evidence or ‘surprise’ in sensory data, given a model of how
92
Dialectics of free energy minimization
they were generated. Crucially, unlike surprise itself, free-energy can be
evaluated because it is a function of sensory data and brain states. In fact,
under simplifying assumptions […], it is just the amount of prediction
error.’ (Friston, 2009: 293)
What sets Friston’s framework apart from just another formal description
of the organism’s behavior is that it formalizes how the organism (including
the brain) is able to maintain itself from the perspective of the system itself. This
starting point is crucial, because it takes serious how the system lacks access to
the distribution of all possible states external to it. It cannot know all possible
configurations of its surroundings. As a matter of fact, the system does not have
access to external states at all, apart from the sensory states these external
states elicit. In this sense external states are “hidden”. It is because external
states and their distribution are only indirectly accessible that the organism 4
is unable to minimize surprise directly. Instead, the organism engages in the
minimization of an upper bound on surprise, which is a problem the organism
can solve, because it relies not on having access to the distribution of possible
external states, but only on internal states (the model in the citation above) and
elicited sensory states (the data). The system minimizes this upper bound on
surprise either by changing its sensory input through action; a process Friston
calls active inference; or by altering its internal anticipatory model: perceptual
inference. On the one hand, ‘action is the only way to underwrite an upper bound
on the entropy of sensations. On the other hand, perceptual inference is the
only way to inform action.’ (Allen & Friston, 2018: 2477). For example, if the
system cannot make out what caused its sensations, in addition to inferring a
probable percept given the context, another option is to move closer in order to
get a better look. In other words, the system has two ways of minimizing free
energy; it minimizes the error of its own anticipations through perceptual and
active inference.
In the process of inference, anticipatory or prediction “errors” refer to the
deviation of sensory data from the predictions or anticipations formulated by
the system. For this reason, it is important to emphasize that these “errors” are
“wrong” only in relation to the anticipations that arise from the system itself.
The standard by which an “error” is determined is strictly immanent to the
system. How the system deals with prediction error is important, because these
errors determine both the system’s configuration, as well as the actions the
system engages in. On the one hand, if these errors are not taken serious enough,
the system is at risk of detaching itself from the demands of its surroundings.
On the other hand, if these errors are taken too seriously, the system may find
93
Chapter 4
itself engrossed by every insignificant change in scenery. In order to cope with
anticipatory error, the system’s challenge is not only to infer its external states,
but the system also needs to determine the degree of certainty or precision
of its inferences. The perspective free energy minimization subscribes to
‘suggests that there are only two sorts of things that need to be inferred about
the world; namely, the state of the world and uncertainty about that state.’
(Friston et al., 2012: 2). To connect with what we said above: uncertainty is
another way to conceive of entropy; to minimize free energy means to resist
being overwhelmed by uncertainty: ‘[o]ur objective, given a model (brain), m, is
to minimize the average uncertainty (entropy) about some generalized sensory
states’ (Feldman & Friston, 2010: 5). In order to constrain the uncertainty of its
states, the system needs to estimate the precision of the disruption (prediction
error) of its anticipatory states. If such disruption is estimated to be precise,
it will exert more influence on future anticipations compared to imprecise
disruption. In the interplay between anticipation and disruption, the dominance
of either is dependent on the precision afforded to both. This enduring conflict
amounts to how something is perceived and what is to be done.
An important implication of Friston’s framework is that it gives a purely
formal description of what the system does in terms of boundary preservation.
In doing so, the framework does not provide an externally imposed normative
account of “optimal” behavior in terms of, for example, reward maximization.
While Friston’s framework prescribes that the system minimizes free energy;
what this minimization entails fully depends on the configuration of the
anticipatory system. In other words, the specifics of free energy minimization
are fully dependent on the contracted internal constitution of the anticipatory
organism, and the surroundings in which this habitual structure dwells. For
that reason, the only normativity involved in free energy minimization is that
it emphasizes ‘the necessary tendency of living organisms to resist the second
law of thermodynamics; i.e., to maintain an internal structure or dynamics in
the face of constant change’ (Allen & Friston, 2018: 2473). Friston’s approach
to neural functioning thus describes and formalizes how, once a state of
relative equilibrium is acquired – to the point where a maintainable boundary
is established – the system organizes and produces itself through a perpetual
loop of sensation and action.
Plasticity? Dialectics? Contradiction?
The etymological proximity of “habit” and “state” indicates that both in the
case of Hegel and Friston, what is at stake is the organization of an anticipatory
structure. In both cases, the organization of this structure takes the form
94
Dialectics of free energy minimization
of a continuous process. Given a boundary, there is a process of boundary-
maintenance. And given the process of boundary-maintenance, the structure
constituted by the boundary is maintained. As such, the only stability that
pertains to this structure consists in the perpetual maintenance of a separation
between inside and outside. In the active process of boundary-maintenance, an
organism under free energy minimization is no longer a passive processor of
external influences, but does this mean that free energy minimization adheres
to the notion of plasticity, as understood by Malabou?
Plasticity for Malabou designates the capacity to receive as well as the
capacity to produce form. In the case of Hegel, we saw that the organism receives
form from external nature, but it also produces form by positing external nature
as part of its own organization. This process of self-production takes the form
of a self-referential process through which the organism participates in its own
determination. In the case of Friston’s framework, we are dealing with exactly 4
the same process. As we have seen, the organism minimizes free energy by
actively limiting the states it occupies through a circular process implicating
both sensation and action. As such, free energy minimization constitutes a
loop in which the reception of form (sensation) and the production of form
(action) are implicated in the same circular process. However, while the self-
determination of sensation is a necessary requirement for the self-production of
form, in order to speak of plasticity in a Hegelian sense we need a process which
captures the reverberation of self-differentiation able to alter the contracted
constitution of the organism’s anticipatory structure. Does free energy
minimization capture this process? Clearly it does; as the organism engages
in perceptual and active inference, the anticipatory model itself is continually
altered in confrontation with the disruption of the anticipations generated by
this model. Under free energy minimization, the reception and production of
form are implicated in the same process: ‘learning and perception are two sides
of the same coin’: ‘perceptual inference (i.e., neurodynamics) and learning (i.e.,
neuroplasticity) are in the game of optimizing the same thing; namely, model
evidence or its variational equivalent (i.e., free energy)’ (Friston, 2018b: 1020-
1021). The only difference is that Friston’s distinction between neurodynamics
and neuroplasticity, fall under the Hegelian notion of plasticity. As such, free
energy minimization is a plastic process. In this sense, Friston’s framework
moves beyond the one-sided conception of plasticity criticized by Malabou,
but is this process dialectical?
What makes the process of plasticity dialectical for Malabou is that in it,
contradictory operations coincide, in the sense that ‘the seizure of form and the
annihilation of all form, emergence and explosion, are contradictory’ (Malabou,
95
Chapter 4
2005: 12). The reception and production of form are not only subsequent stages
in the formation of the organism, but both capacities actualize simultaneously.
Every reception of form implies the simultaneous production of form as the
organism incorporates the influences it undergoes. Put differently, whenever
the organism converges on a state, the organism’s overall state by definition
encloses anticipation and the disruption of anticipation in the form of
anticipatory error. In this sense, as in the case of Hegel, Friston’s anticipatory
organism “has itself for its object” and maintains a break not only with
its surroundings, but with itself as well. It is only in the coincidence of the
anticipatory organism’s structure (identity) and its disruption (“error”) that
this structure is altered in anticipation of what to expect next: ‘the threat of
the explosion of form structurally inhabits every form. All current identity
maintains itself only at the cost of a struggle against its autodestruction: it
is in this sense that identity is dialectical in nature.’ (Malabou, 2008: 71). In
other words, the coincidence of (perceptual) inference and learning stems
from the coincidence of anticipation with its negation. As such, the organism
is simultaneously and necessarily subject to deformation in the process of its
own formation. The convergence of Hegel and Friston shows how Friston’s
free energy minimization is a modern-day instantiation of Hegel’s dialectical
process of plasticity. Indeed, how ‘it is Hegel who will have discovered before its
discovery the plastic materiality of being: that free energy, whether organic or
synthetic, which circulates throughout in each and every life’ (Malabou, 2005:
193).
And yet, it is not enough to designate the formation-deformation of the
organism’s structure-process. Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature does not stop there.
We need to ground the unrelenting continuation of this process. Said differently,
we need to ground the anticipatory organism’s internal purposiveness. How?
We saw that Hegel’s designation of the organism ended with the primacy of
contradiction constitutive of the organism’s life: in passing through the tension
between abstract and relational, we saw that the organism itself sustains
contradiction between habitual structure and deficiency. We need to show how
the movement of plasticity is sustained by ‘the contradictory tension between
particular determinacy and its dissolvement into the universal.’ (Malabou,
2005: 12). It is here where Friston, and the appropriations of his framework in
terms of cognitivism and enactivism, do not go far enough.
96
Dialectics of free energy minimization
4.5. From tension to contradiction
The first question we set out to answer was the following: is free energy
minimization a formalization of a dialectical process of plasticity, as understood
by Malabou as the capacity both to receive and to produce form? Above we saw
that this is indeed the case: both Malabou and Friston capture a self-productive
process which simultaneously implicates formation as well as deformation. That
brings us to the second question we posed: can we enact the Hegelian shift
from tension to contradiction with regards to free energy minimization? What
tension are we referring to?
There are two tensions that pertain to free energy minimization. The first
is theoretical: the tension between cognitivism and enactivism; seclusion and
openness. Cognitivism and enactivism are two theoretical frameworks that
fundamentally differ in their approach to the mind and brain. Cognitivism 4
dates back to the cognitive revolution of the 1950s, in which the emphasis
shifted from behaviorism to the way the mind processes information (e.g., see
Miller, 2003). Enactivism is a more recent approach which builds on ecological
psychology, embodied cognition, and situated cognition. It is often contrasted
with cognitivism, because enactivism places great emphasis on the dynamic
interaction between brain, body, and environment, beyond mere information-
processing (e.g., see Thompson & Varela, 2001). As we will see below, the
appearance of Friston’s framework differs substantially, depending on the
perspective we adopt.
The second tension pertains to the organism itself: under free energy
minimization, the anticipatory organism is subject to the unsolvable imperative
to minimize free energy, in that it continually sustains anticipatory error.
Our wager is that these tensions overlap: the tension between seclusion and
openness is the unsolvable tension of free energy minimization. We will begin
with the theoretical tension (Section 4.1), after which we will move on to the
unsolvable imperative of Friston’s framework (Section 4.2). Finally, we will
attempt to enact the shift from tension to contradiction with regards to free
energy minimization (Section 4.3).
Seclusion and openness
The theoretical struggle surrounding the appropriation of Friston’s framework
revolves around ‘the tension between internalist and externalist approaches’
(Allen & Friston, 2018: 2478). This tension revolves around the following
question: is the organism separated or secluded from the surroundings in which
97
Chapter 4
it dwells, or should the emphasis lie with the organism’s embeddedness in and
perpetual openness to these surroundings?
The first position is defended most forcefully by Jacob Hohwy:
‘All perceptual and active inference happens in an interplay between the
evidence to the system, that is, activity at the sensory epithelia, and the
predictions generated under the overall model in the brain. This creates
a sensory blanket—the evidentiary boundary—that is permeable only in
the sense that inferences can be made about the causes of sensory input
hidden beyond the boundary.’ (Hohwy, 2016: 265)
From this perspective, the emphasis lies fully with the seclusion of the internal
anticipatory model within the confines of the skull. All of the organism’s activity
(bodily or otherwise) stands in service of the optimization of this model. As
such, free energy minimization becomes ‘more neurocentrically skull-bound
than embodied or extended, and action itself is more an inferential process
on sensory input than an enactive coupling with the body and environment’
(Hohwy, 2016: 259).
The second position – emphasizing the brain and body’s embeddedness/
perpetual openness – is formulated succinctly by Jelle Bruineberg and Erik
Rietveld:
‘The FEP [free energy principle] implies a deep connection between
the dynamics of the brain-body-environment system and the
neurodynamics. […] The function of the generative model is therefore
not to provide the agent with a representation of the dynamical structure
of the environment per se, but rather to steer its interactions with its
environment in such a way that a robust brain-body-environment system
is maintained. (Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014: 7)
From the enactivist position, the skull-secluded internal model stands in
service of the organism’s selective openness towards the affordances provided
by the environment. Due to this enduring relation between the organism and
its surroundings, the ‘organism does not need to have a model of its niche, but
rather the claim is that the structure of the niche is reflected in the structure of
the skilled embodied organism’ (Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014: 8). In other words,
98
Dialectics of free energy minimization
the organism ‘does not have a model of its world – it is a model.’ (Friston, 2013a).
How to resolve the tension between cognitivism and enactivism?
Not only do both positions have merit, but they follow logically from free
energy minimization, and neither are naïve. The enactivists recognize the
requirement for a distinctive entity in order for there to be a ‘brain-body-
environment system’: ‘[o]ne might object that there is still a non-trivial
boundary separating the system from its environment […]. We agree […].’
(Bruineberg et al., 2016: 2438). At the same time, Hohwy is well aware that
the skull-secluded internal model is simultaneously open to its environment.
For him, the ‘challenge is then to balance seclusion and openness in our
understanding of the mind-world relation’ (Hohwy, 2016: 266).
For Friston himself, ‘the FEP [free energy principle] resolves the tension
between internalist [cognitivist] and externalist [enactivist] approaches’ (Allen
& Friston, 2016: 2478). The solution takes the form of “a little bit of both”: 4
‘Clearly, the active inference account satisfies the criteria for a radically
embodied theory of mind. According to the free energy principle, an organism
is best understood as a system of mutually interlocking systems; the body,
mind and environment are inextricably bound up in the organism’s free
energy minimization: in fact, all the heavy lifting done by active inference is
in preserving a degree of (statistical) separation between the body, mind and
environment’ (Allen & Friston, 2018: 2475-2476)
Although ultimately, ‘the FEP offers a formal path forward for enactivism.
By providing a guideline to discovery, the normative principles embedded within
the approach allow enactivists to go beyond arguing about the demarcations
of the organism.’ (Allen & Friston, 2018: 2478). In other words, what we get
is a balanced solution with a little bit more enactivism than cognitivism. The
question is whether “finding the right balance” is the best we can do; whether
the tension between cognitivism and enactivism is to be resolved at all.
Tension redoubled
What makes free energy minimization such a compelling framework is that it
is grounded in the necessary preconditions for the existence of the organism
(Allen & Friston, 2018: 2473). If this claim is justified, and if the cognitivist and
enactivist accounts follow logically from it, should we not consider whether
the tension between both positions pertains to the anticipatory organism
itself? Despite the ‘deep reciprocity between the embodied and environmental
facts of the organism’ (Allen & Friston, 2018: 2475), and the endless variations
on transient extended cognitive systems (Clark, 2016a), ‘the very existence
of a system mandates the separation between the system and its external
99
Chapter 4
milieu’ (Allen & Friston, 2018: 2473). As such, the tension between cognitivism
and enactivism is not only maintained, but we can only get the extended,
enactivist account through the cognitivist emphasis; through the imposition
of a boundary. It only makes sense to speak of the organism on account of the
existence of a minimal separation between organism and surroundings. Is this
not the same problem we encountered in Hegel? Are we not again dealing with
the tension between an abstract and a relational conception; a contradiction
between independence and dependence?
We can easily reframe the tension between cognitivism and enactivism
in terms of the stages Hegel distinguished. The cognitivist conception of the
minimization process corresponds to the organism understood as a ‘system of
sensibility’, which subsequently is differentiated outwards through its sensory
and motor nerves. These are the moments that Hegel calls sensibility and
irritability, respectively. From this perspective, the organism appears as a self-
subsistent entity, where all the emphasis is placed on the internal organization
of the organism undergoing change in a perpetual process of reproduction.
Against this abstract designation, enactivists emphasize the necessity of the
relation that the organism maintains with its outside, through which the
organism engages in mutual exchange with its surroundings. And yet, the
necessity of this relation depends on the existence of a self-subsistent entity.
Without seclusion, there would be no open exchange, since there would be no
system to engage in exchange. The paradox is that the possibility of perpetual
exchange only arises from a situation in which an organism maintains a
boundary between itself and its surroundings. The other way around also holds:
the organism maintains its seclusion only by engaging in open exchange with
its outside. Thus, by maintaining their precarious minimal degree of autonomy,
it implies that ‘organisms, by being organizationally closed, are also necessarily
thermodynamically open’ (Marques & Brito, 2014: 99). However, as in the case
of Hegel, we are not just dealing with tension between conceptual formulations:
Friston’s anticipatory organism itself sustains tension.
For the organism, there is no way to establish the accuracy of its
anticipations. All the organism can do is minimize the discrepancy between its
anticipations and its elicited sensory states, by either changing its anticipatory
model, or its sensory states through action. In Friston’s mathematical
formalizations, the minimization problem revolves around the difference
between probability distributions already present on the one hand, and
inferred probability distributions based on new input on the other. Indeed,
‘this difference is always positive’ (Friston, 2010: 128). Said differently, since
minimizing free energy ‘places an upper bound on the entropy or dispersion
100
Dialectics of free energy minimization
of sensory states’ (Friston, 2012: 2), the implication is that the system is
continually subject to dispersion in need of bounding. The organism cannot
let its sensory states disperse indefinitely if it is to maintain a minimum of
consistency. At the same time, because the organism operates from within its
own bounded organization, without direct access to its hidden external states,
the organism also cannot get rid of dispersion entirely. Concretely, dispersion
is nothing but the anticipatory error the organism sustains in the convergence
on every state it takes up. As the organism moves through different states, each
configuration is simultaneously marked by error; each anticipation is subject
to disruption. The continuous state of tension under free energy minimization
resides in the inseparable combination of anticipatory state “plus” disruption.
Two questions need to be asked at this point. First, where is this tension located?
Are we dealing with tension between the organism and its surroundings, or is
it a tension within the organism itself? Second, how to conceive of this tension? 4
Is its solution a goal the organism strives towards, or is it a problem concurrent
with and constitutive of the organism’s existence?
Contradiction again
While both cognitivists and enactivists recognize the necessity of an enduring
tension under free energy minimization, they differ in their conception
of this tension. For enactivists, the organism maintains an ‘ever present
dis-attunement between environmental dynamics and internal dynamics’
(Bruineberg et al., 2016: 5). At first glance, this formulation makes perfect
sense. After all, the organism needs to maintain itself in the face of external
nature. We found a similar formulation in Hegel, where the organism is directed
towards the outer world ‘as being inwardly in a state of tension towards it’
(Hegel, 2004: 381, §357). The crucial difference is that in the case of Hegel, the
organism is inwardly in a state of tension towards its surroundings. While it is
of course true that the organism stands in tension or dis-attunement toward its
surroundings, external nature does not act directly on the organism’s internal
organization, because this internality is shielded by a boundary comprised
of sensory and action states. Since the relationship between the organism’s
internal organization and its external states is mediated by this boundary, there
is no tension operative directly between the organism and its surroundings;
between internal and external dynamics. Instead, this tension is sustained
internal to the organism’s organization; namely, between the organism’s
internal anticipatory model and its sensory states. As hairsplitting as this
distinction may seem, it is crucial, as we will see below.
101
Chapter 4
From the perspective of cognitivism, both the unsolvable status, as well
as the internality of the minimization problem is recognized: the ‘prediction
error or free energy bound on surprise is never zero.’ (Hohwy, 2013: 172). As such,
the organism ‘is engaged in an internal struggle to make its states fit with its
input’ (Hohwy, 2013: 179). However, from this perspective, the minimization
problem becomes a ‘moving, ultimately unobtainable goal’ (Hohwy, 2013:
174). The question is whether this formulation is justified. Can we say that the
organism strives towards resolving its own minimization problem? What would
such a solution entail? Can there be a living organism that is not subject to the
imperative to minimize free energy?
With these questions we touch on the paradoxical status of free energy
minimization. There is no room in Friston’s framework for a grand conclusion
where the organism succeeds definitively in the minimization of free energy.
At least, not if the organism is to maintain itself as a distinct entity. From
the perspective of Friston’s framework, a bounded organization necessarily
engages in free energy minimization, but for minimization to take place there
needs to be a bounded organization. For the living organism, this means that
the only way to escape from the imperative to minimize; to escape from this
state of tension, is to give up its bounded organization. In other words, death
is the only definitive solution to the problem of free energy minimization. The
paradox is that an unresolvable state of tension arises concurrently with the
imposition of a boundary; with the precondition for the organism’s existence.
It is because of the concomitance of boundary and tension that we need to
invert our perspective, to the point where we repeat the procedure of Hegel’s
philosophical exposition with regards to Friston’s framework; in order to
enact the shift from unsolvable tension to contradiction constitutive of the
organism’s life.
With this shift we return to the opposition between external and internal
purposiveness, and the problem of natural ends. In the same way that the
tension between cognitivism and enactivism is not a sole theoretical tension,
but simultaneously operative at the level of the organism itself; the opposition
between external and internal purposiveness does not pertain only to the level
of explanation. We are not just dealing with the problem of how to ground an
explanation of the organism in the preconditions for the existence of that
organism; the problem is equally that which grounds the organism’s perpetual
anticipatory activity. In the same way that the organism in Hegel sustains
contradiction between habitual structure and deficiency, Friston’s anticipatory
organism sustains contradiction between internal states and dispersion. In
both the case of Hegel and Friston, the role of dispersion and deficiency is that
102
Dialectics of free energy minimization
of lack positivized: an interruption which nonetheless plays a “positive” role
in the internally directed revision, or externally directed activity it drives.
To take Hegel’s example of hunger, it is on account of the organism’s
internal deficiency that it seeks out, ingests, and digests food. If the organism
is to maintain its life, it cannot let its deficiency run amok; if it does not
address its hunger, it will die. In this sense, the Hegelian organism also bounds
deficiency. The great advantage of free energy minimization is that the basic
logic of Hegel’s elementary example of hunger is truly ‘particularized in an
infinite variety of ways’ (Hegel, 2004: 388, §360). With Friston’s framework,
the basic logic of Hegel’s dialectical process is generalized to every aspect
of the organism’s perceptual and motor capacities, whereby the entirety of
the organism’s internal structure “feeds off” its surroundings. If Hegel’s
contradictory organism is a process that revolves around its own deficiency,
then free energy minimization is a process which subsumes and bounds all of 4
the organism’s deficiencies. Not only do both free energy minimization and
activity of deficiency pertain to a perpetual process of self-organization and
self-production, but free energy minimization is activity of deficiency.
Due to the recurrence of deficiency, and the concomitance of this recurring
problem with the existence of a boundary, it is insufficient to formulate the
minimization of free energy in terms of an unobtainable goal. For the organism,
there is no unobtainable goal, because the “goal” consists in sustaining the
continuous process itself, through which dispersion or lack inherent to the
organism’s organization is constrained, and a boundary is maintained. We
could say the “goal” is continually “reached” and “missed” simultaneously.
A definitive solution to the problem of free energy minimization is repeatedly
missed, but this miss is the goal itself. More precisely, we are dealing with the
‘splitting between goal and aim, the moment when the true aim is no longer to
hit the goal but to maintain the very circular movement of repeatedly missing
it.’ (Žižek, 1993: 199). In this sense the organism exists as a natural end: the
process of free energy minimization is without end, because the end is the
process of free energy minimization itself. As such, the direction of boundary-
maintenance is not outwards: in the attempt of biological systems to maintain
their states and form, we are dealing with a process that is thoroughly self-
directed.
In addition to the designation of the organism’s self-movement in terms of
self-organization, self-production, and self-determination, perhaps it is self-
limitation which best captures the convergence between Hegel and Friston,
and simultaneously announces their minimal, but crucial difference. As the
organism revisits a limited number of states that lie within its physiological
103
Chapter 4
bounds, it engages in a limiting movement of the “self” directed at the “self”:
‘life emerges when external limitation (of an entity by its environs) turns into
self-limitation.’ (Žižek, 2009: 205). This is the process that is central both in the
case of Hegel and Friston: everything hinges on the existence and maintenance
of a boundary. No boundary, no organism.
At the same time, self-limitation is operative in terms of a limitation (lack)
at the level of the “self”:
‘Where there is a limitation [Schranke], it is a negation only for a third, for
an external comparison. But it is lack only in so far as the lack’s overcoming is
equally present in the same thing, and contradiction is, as such, immanent and
explicitly present in that thing.’ (Hegel, 2004: 385, §359)
While both Hegel and Friston emphasize the necessity of an organization
that is bounded [beschränkt], only in Hegel we find the primacy of contradiction
constitutive of the process that sustains such bounded organization. If we
enact the shift from tension to contradiction, the unsolvable status of the
minimization problem functions not as an unobtainable goal, but serves first
and foremost as the condition both for the organism’s existence as well as its
perpetual free energy minimization. Only in trying to overcome the unsolvable
obstacle of its persistent deficiency or dispersion does the organism continue to
anticipate: it is this continually present inherent limitation around which the
organism’s anticipatory activity circulates. For this reason, the tension between
organism and surroundings needs to be transposed back into the organism,
to the point where we conceive of this tension as the organism’s constitutive
contradiction.
To return to the opening problem of this section: the tension between
internalist and externalist approaches is not only retained; it is elevated
to a contradiction constitutive of the perpetual process of free energy
minimization. If the organism’s founding gesture is the imposition of a
boundary, then this gesture simultaneously condemns the living being to a
life of sustained contradiction. This is the fundamental dialectic of Friston’s
free energy minimization expressed in the opposing positions of cognitivism
and enactivism.
This perspective dissolves the so-called “dark-room problem”: the question
concerning why, if an organism is primarily concerned with the minimization
of prediction error/free energy, it does not simply seek out a dark and silent
place: if there is no input to the system, then there is nothing to minimize.
This is a problem only if we conceive of the organism as a fully autonomous
and constituted entity, which subsequently engages in minimization. From
a Hegelian perspective, it is a problem only if we remain at the level of an
104
Dialectics of free energy minimization
abstract designation in terms of sensibility and irritability. If instead, we
follow Hegel to the very end, the organism’s constitutive contradiction appears
equally necessary for the organism’s existence; no less so than the existence
of a boundary. From this perspective, the organism’s activity is grounded not
in some positive aspect of its organization, but in the sustained negation of
this organization, around which the organism’s anticipatory self-production
circulates (see Fig. 1). In dealing with the dark-room problem, it is not enough to
emphasize the need for continued scientific work; how, in ‘due course, realistic
working models will be forthcoming, at which stage this philosophical debate
will rightly give way to detailed empirical evaluation of the claims being made.’
(Friston et al., 2012: 6). While Friston’s declaration and willingness to abandon
his framework in the face of failure is admirable (a stance admittedly missing
in Hegel, see (Žižek, 2012: 462); perhaps there won’t be a need to ‘search for a
better model!’ (Friston et al., 2012: 6). Hegel’s philosophy is well able to dispose 4
of “philosophical debates” such as the dark-room problem on its own. And if
we enact the Hegelian shift from tension to contradiction with regards to free
energy minimization, so is Friston’s framework.
Figure 1. Schematic presentation of the contradictory organism. Every organism (blue) operates
within the dynamics of its surroundings (brown). The organism’s structure as distinct from its
surroundings is maintained only as a continuous process of self-organization and self-production,
revolving around recurring lack or dispersion (white) internal to the organism’s organization
(Cf. Friston, 2005, Figure 1). The organism’s internal habitual model is a representation of, and
“feeds off”, its surroundings.
105
Chapter 4
4.6. Discussion
This paper sprang from the convergence between Hegelian dialectics and
Friston’s approach to the brain. We set out to answer two questions. First, is free
energy minimization a formalization of the dialectical process of plasticity, as
understood by Malabou? We saw that indeed, in the coincidence of free energy
minimization and the Hegelian notion of plasticity, Friston provides us with
an approach to the brain which reinvigorates Hegelian dialectics from the
perspective of neuroscience. In both cases, we are dealing with a perpetual
process in which form is received and produced, and where formation and
deformation occur simultaneously. Whether we speak in terms of a habitual
anticipatory structure, or a model comprised of anticipatory states, what is
important is that in both cases, the organism does not have a model, but is
a model; there is no organism outside the process wherein its anticipatory
structure is continually reproduced and transformed.
The second question central to this paper was this: can we enact the
Hegelian shift from tension to contradiction with regards to free energy
minimization? This question touched on two tensions simultaneously:
theoretical and actual. In Hegel’s work, we saw that the determination of the
organism took the form of a succession of stages, passing from abstract to
relational; from independence to dependence. However, the tension between
these designations was not resolved. On the contrary, this tension needed to
be located and mobilized in the actual workings of the organism itself. This
is where we encountered the shift from tension to contradiction. If tension
pertains to an opposition between concepts (e.g., seclusion and openness) or
entities (e.g., organism and surroundings), then contradiction is an antagonism
internal to one of the terms. In our case, we saw that this contradiction pertains
to the organism’s simultaneous maintenance of identity, as well as the negation
of this identity in the form of recurring lack or deficiency. The attempt to
answer the second question central to this paper could be viewed as nothing
more than the attempt to repeat Hegel’s procedure with regards to Friston’s
free energy minimization. First, we regarded the conceptual tension between
cognitivism and enactivism; between the emphasis on seclusion and openness.
We tried to cast this tension as the succession from an abstract to a relational
conception of the organism. Second, instead of trying to resolve this tension,
we shifted our attention to the organism’s actual tension under free energy
minimization; namely, the organism’s unrelenting imperative to minimize
entropy, dispersion, or anticipatory “error”. In this sense, both “lack” in Hegel,
and “dispersion” in Friston, serve the same structural role: they threaten the
106
Dialectics of free energy minimization
perpetuation of the organism’s organization and as such, must be kept within
bounds. Finally, because the organism’s contradiction between identity and
negation exists concurrently with the existence of a boundary, it is constitutive
for the organism’s existence and at the basis of the organism’s perpetual
anticipatory activity. As such, the shift from tension to contradiction allows
us to see how Friston’s free energy minimization is a modern instantiation of
Hegelian dialectics.
While we appealed to Hegel in order to bring to light the contradictory
tension at the centre of free energy minimization, we should emphasize
that Friston’s framework goes beyond Hegel in the generalization of the
rudimentary example of hunger to the organism’s functioning in the broadest
possible sense, to the point where the logic of plasticity pervades every aspect
of the organism’s functioning. Furthermore, Friston’s framework goes beyond
Hegel in the specification of the concurrent processes of anticipation and 4
precision estimation. Not only is the organism an anticipatory structure, but the
transience of this structure depends on the continuous interplay between the
anticipatory state, the precision of this state, as well as the precision afforded
to the disruption of this state. As such, free energy minimization formalizes the
mechanism that determines an organization’s plasticity, in which the Hegelian
legacy is maintained.
107
Chapter 5
Learning to predict based on self- versus
externally induced prediction violations:
a direct comparison using a Bayesian
inference modelling approach
In preparation as:
Boonstra, E. A. & Slagter, H. A. (in prep.). Learning to predict based on self-
versus externally induced prediction violations: a direct comparison using a
Bayesian inference modelling approach.
Chapter 5
5.1. Abstract
Predictive processing is quickly gaining ground as a theory of perception and
attention. From this perspective the brain is cast as an organism’s predictive
model of how its world works and will continue to work in the future. However,
research on the brain’s predictive capacities remains beholden to traditional
research practices in which participants are passively shown stimuli without
their active involvement. The current study is an investigation into ways
in which self-generated predictions may differ from externally induced
predictions. Participants completed a volatile spatial attention task under
both conditions on different days. We used the Hierarchical Gaussian Filter,
an approximate Bayesian inference model, to determine subject-specific
parameters of belief-updating and inferred volatility. We found preliminary
evidence in support of self-generated predictions incurring a larger reaction
time cost when violated compared to predictions induced by sensory cue, which
translated to participants’ increased sensitivity to changes in environmental
volatility. Our results suggest that internally generated predictions may be
afforded more weight, but these results are complicated by session order and
duration effects, as well as a lack of statistical power. We discuss the limitations
of our study preventing us from replicating previous research, and ways to
remedy these shortcomings in future studies.
110
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
5.2. Introduction
The study of perception and attention in living organisms is most often
conducted from an outside-in perspective, from which primacy is afforded to
information and stimuli impinging on sensory epithelia. For example, tasks are
used in which external cues tell participants where to attend. This perspective or
approach becomes problematic if we recognize that living organisms maintain
internal dynamics of their own, based on which they perceive, attend, act, and
operate. Indeed, it has been argued that an inside-out perspective, where an
organism’s internal states are afforded primacy, is a more appropriate starting
point for the study of brain and behavior (Buzsáki, 2019).
An inside-out perspective is inherent to research on self-elicited action-
effects. Already in the 1970s, the seminal study by Schafer and Marcus (1973)
reported that self-delivered auditory and visual stimuli attenuated the
amplitude of event-related potentials (ERPs) by respectively 50% and 28%,
compared to when stimuli were machine-delivered. Since then, research on 5
the directional relationship from action to perception has been framed in terms
of agency; revolving around the question how and to what degree the system
ascribes the cause of sensation to itself, in contrast to unsolicited stimulation
from outside (Synofzik et al., 2013; Wen, 2019) and action-effects (Elsner &
Hommel, 2001; Hommel, 1996, 2019; Hommel & Elsner, 2009; Prinz, 1997). In
the auditory domain in particular, the finding that self-generated tones are
accompanied by attenuated early ERPs such as the N1 and P2 has been replicated
many times (Korka et al., 2022), but the behavioral effect is less conclusive:
perceptual sensitivity has been found to both decrease (Weiss et al., 2011; Weiss
& Schütz-Bosbach, 2012) and increase (Reznik et al., 2014; Reznik & Mukamel,
2019). While the auditory domain is more extensively studied, similar neural
effects have been observed for the visual domain (Cardoso-Leite et al., 2010;
Nittono, 2004; Nittono et al., 2003; Vasser et al., 2019; but see Schwarz et
al., 2018). While the exact workings of the relationship between action and
perception are unclear as of yet, it is clear that stimuli stemming from self-
generated predictions are processed differently from externally induced ones.
An inside-out perspective is also part and parcel of predictive processing
approaches to the study of brain and behavior (Clark, 2013; Friston, 2010;
Hohwy, 2013). From these perspectives, the brain instantiates an organism’s
predictive model of its outside world, which upholds expectations regarding
how this world works and how it will continue to work in the future. This
model undergoes changes as the organism is confronted with violations to its
expectations; violations it tries to minimize overall. This process of model-
111
Chapter 5
updating and prediction error minimization can be cast as approximate
Bayesian inference (Da Costa et al., 2021; Knill & Pouget, 2004; Pouget et al.,
2013). From this perspective as well, the violation of internally and externally
generated predictions are thought to be weighted differently (H. Brown et al.,
2013), but to our knowledge no study has made this comparison directly for the
visual domain within the context of Bayesian predictive perceptual processing.
We set out to test this difference within the context of the Hierarchical
Gaussian Filter (HGF); a computational model implementing approximate
Bayesian inference linking three hierarchically ordered levels capturing not
only trial-by-trial probability estimates, but also the inferred volatility of an
agent’s environment (Mathys et al., 2011; Mathys et al., 2014). We rely heavily
on earlier work in which this model was used to show how model-updating
changed over time in the context of a spatial attention task (Vossel, Bauer, et
al., 2014; Vossel, Mathys, et al., 2014). In these studies, a cue indicated whether
a target would appear left or right of fixation. Crucially, the probability with
which the cue was valid changed over the course of the experiment across three
levels (50, 69, 88%) unbeknownst to participants. It was found that participants
were not only faster with eye movement responses on valid compared to invalid
(e.g., cue indicating left, target appearing right) trials, but this effect was
stronger on blocks where the probability of a valid cue was larger. In terms of
modelling, they found an optimal model aligned with the proposal by Feldman
and Friston (2010), suggesting that in general the precision of prediction errors
drive changes in model-updating, to the point that higher precision results
in more rapid updating, and where in the case of this particular model, the
trial-by-trial precision estimate of the first-level prediction drives responses.
The importance of contrasting this setup with an action condition in which
predictions are self-generated comes from the idea that through action, a
predictive system can actively test the validity of its internal model. Instead
of being at the whim of external stimulation (passively awaiting what comes
in), the system can generate sensory information to actively test its models,
facilitating the speed at which reliable models can be produced.
Our main research question is as follows: how does the response to induced
predictions and their violation differ when these predictions stem from
externally generated sensory cues compared to internally generated action?
We first report a pilot study in which we transposed the experimental
design by Vossel and colleagues (2014) to an action-effect paradigm. Our pilot
was the same as the original study, except that spatial predictions were self-
generated by participants’ own actions instead of external cues. We expected
112
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
to replicate Vossel and colleagues (2014) by finding slower eye movement
responses for invalid compared to valid trials, and that this difference would
be larger for higher probability blocks. Like Vossel and colleagues (2014), we
expected an optimal “precision” response model to account for these findings.
An indirect comparison with Vossel et al.’s findings showed that the RT cost
for violated predictions were larger when this prediction stemmed from self-
generated action, in our pilot study, which shaped our hypotheses for our main
within-subject experiment in which participants completed an action and
cue version of the same task on different days. This allowed us to critically,
directly test if these conditions differ by keeping constant as many confounds
as possible.
We expected to replicate and extend our pilot finding; that the violation of
predictions through invalid trials would incur a larger reaction time cost when
a prediction stems from action rather than from a sensory cue. Moreover, in
terms of HGF modelling, we expected to see these effects reflected in a larger
belief-updating parameter ( 2 , see below) for the action condition. This would 5
support the notion that perceptual predictions are afforded more weight when
ω
they are self-generated.
5.3. Methods
Participants
Twenty participants were recruited from the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
subject pool for the pilot, while thirty-five participants were recruited for the
main experiment. After exclusion based on pre-specified criteria (see below), the
final sample for the pilot consisted of 19 participants (mean age 21.2, range 18-31
years, 16 women), while for the main experiment 25 remained (mean age 19.8,
range 18-23 years, 20 women). All participants reported normal or corrected-
to-normal vision, provided written informed consent prior to participation,
and received either a monetary reward or course credit for participating. The
experiment was approved by the ethics review board of the Faculty of Behavioral
and Movement Sciences of the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.
Procedure and experimental paradigm
In the pilot study, participants performed a spatial predictability task, in which
the predictability of the sensory outcomes of their own actions (a button press)
varied across trials. In the main experiment, participants came to the lab for
two sessions, and either performed this task or a task in which the spatial
predictability of a visual cue was varied across trials (cf. Vossel et al., 2014).
113
Chapter 5
In both tasks, participants had to move their eyes as quickly and as accurately
as possible to a target appearing either to the left or right of a central fixation
cross. The design and analyses of the main experiment were preregistered
(https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/V6DJ2), unless otherwise noted.
Stimuli were presented on a CRT monitor (1680 × 1050 pixels, 75 Hz). Eye
movements were recorded using an EyeLink 1000 Plus eye tracker (SR research,
Ontario, Canada). Participants viewed the screen through a chinrest at a
distance of 70 cm.
Participants were instructed to fixate centrally on an ABC fixation dot as
defined by Thaler and colleagues (2013) (.55° in size) until a target appeared.
Once the eye tracker registered fixation, the trial would start 500 ms later by
the presentation of two squares on the horizontal midline (1.9° in size, 8.1° from
fixation) to the left and right of the fixation dot, indicating to participants either
an impending cue or that they were to initiate an action, depending on the
condition. In the action condition, participants initiated trials by freely choosing
one of two buttons (“s” and “k” on a standard keyboard) with their index
fingers. The left (“s”) button most often gave rise to a target on the left, while
the right (“k”) button had the same function for a target on the right, exploiting
a natural spatial association (Leuthold, 2011; Simon & Rudell, 1967), also present
for the left and right arrow head cues used in the cue condition (Figure 1a).
Participants were instructed to use both buttons approximately evenly, and to
avoid simply alternating between buttons. On average participants took 534
ms (SD: 134 ms) to initiate an action. In the cue condition, a cue was presented
after 500 ms for 200 ms without the participant’s involvement. 800 ms after
an action or a cue, a target in the form of a gabor patch (1.3° in size) appeared in
one of the two placeholders to which participants were instructed to move their
gaze as quickly and as accurately as possible. Once participant’s gaze reached
the target, or after 1700 ms, the trial would end and the next trial would start
(see Figure 1).
One session took approximately 1.5 h, in which participants completed a
practice block of 36 trials, as well as 612 experimental trials, evenly divided into
18 blocks of either 32 or 36 trials. Trials in the cue condition were interspersed
with 108 “null-trials”, where only the baseline display (fixation and squares)
were shown to interrupt the flow of trial presentation (cf. Vossel et al., 2014).
Crucially, blocks of trials varied unbeknownst to participants in how likely the
target was to follow either cue or action. Said differently, when a cue indicated
left or when a participant pressed the left button, it was uncertain whether the
target would appear on the left side. This validity probability varied block wise
114
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
at 88, 69, and 50%. The practice block was steady in terms of validity probability
at 88%. We used a within-subject design where all participants completed two
sessions on different days with at least one day in between. The pilot consisted
only of the action session.
5
Figure 1. Experimental procedure for one trial in the a) cue and b) action condition. Depending
on the condition, a cue or an action predicted whether a target was likely to appear left or right of
fixation or equally often at either location, and participants had to move their gaze to the target
when it subsequently appeared.
Eye tracking and preprocessing
We used the same analysis pipeline for all the data reported in this paper. All
data were analyzed offline. In line with Vossel and colleagues (2014), the start
and endpoints of saccades were defined using a velocity-based algorithm, except
we used the data-driven method developed by Nyström and Holmqvist (2010) to
account for individual differences and thereby maximize sensitivity for saccade
detection. We calculated saccade latency (time between target presentation and
the start of the first eye movement) and landing position of the first saccade for
every trial. In line with Vossel and colleagues (2014), only the first saccade was
analyzed. A target was considered reached when participant’s gaze traversed at
115
Chapter 5
least two-thirds of the distance towards the target for at least 10 ms. Trials were
excluded when a saccade started out more than 1° from fixation, when saccadic
RT was smaller than 90 ms, when less than two-thirds of the distance was
traversed to one of either target locations, when no saccade could be detected,
when a trial contained more than 20% missing values, and when a response was
incorrect. Individual participants were excluded from analyses entirely when
we found more than 50% of their data to be missing. In this way we excluded
one participant for the pilot and two for the main experiment to arrive at our
final samples.
Data analysis
Pilot experiment
Our main dependent measure was response speed (RS): the inverse of saccadic
reaction time due to its normal distribution (Vossel, Mathys, et al., 2014).
To verify that the probability and validity manipulations worked also when
predictions were internally generated through action, we ran a 3 (Probability;
88/69/50%) x 2 (Validity; valid/invalid) repeated-measures ANOVA with RS as
the dependent measure.
Main experiment
To test our main question, whether internally generated predictions differ
from externally induced ones, we conducted, as preregistered, a 3 (Probability;
88/69/50%) x 2 (Validity; valid/invalid) x 2 (Expectation; action-/cue-induced)
repeated-measures ANOVA with RS as the dependent measure. We computed
two additional ANOVAs to control for possible confounds. One with the between-
subject variable Session Order added, and one in addition to our preregistration,
but in line with Vossel and colleagues (2014), with the within-subject variable
Time (first/second half of the experiment). We report Greenhouse-Geisser
corrected p-values when the assumption of sphericity was violated, as indicated
by decimal denoted degrees of freedom.
To evaluate evidence in favor of our (null) hypotheses, we conducted
Bayesian statistics. For each reported frequentist ANOVA, we report the Bayes
factor corresponding to the inclusion of a factor or interaction within the model
in question (shortened to BF ), compared to equivalent models stripped of
incl
the effect. For example, BF = 10 indicates that a model including the factor in
incl
question is ten times more likely given the data compared to a model without
the variable. Conversely, BF = .1 indicates that a model without said effect is
incl
ten times more likely given the data. In addition to frequentist t-tests, we report
116
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
the Bayes factor corresponding to the relative likelihood of a difference between
conditions versus no difference (shortened to BF ). All Bayesian statistics were
10
conducted using JASP version 0.16.2 (Love et al., 2019).
Data visualization was performed with the help of raincloud plots (Allen et
al., 2019), which include the mean, individual data points, as well as the overall
distribution of the measure in question.
HGF
To formalize subject-specific trial-by-trial belief updating, we employed a
Hierarchical Gaussian Filter (HGF) as implemented in the TAPAS toolbox (http://
www.trans lationalneuromodeling.org/tapas/) (Frässle et al., 2021; Mathys et
al., 2011; Mathys et al., 2014) for MATLAB (2019a, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick,
Massachusetts, United States). The HGF is a Bayesian hierarchical learning
model consisting of a perceptual part in which a probability is estimated
(in the case of the current study the probability of a valid cue/action), and a
response part in which this probability estimate is transformed into RS (see 5
Figure 2). An important advantage of this model is that because it implements
approximate (or variational) Bayesian inference, it avoids the computationally
costly procedure of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, a commonly
used Bayesian modelling framework (cf. Wagenmakers & Lee, 2014).
117
Chapter 5
Figure 2. The hierarchical gaussian filter (HGF). Adapted from Vossel and colleagues (2014).
The first level (x(t)) of the perceptual model comprises a Bernoulli distribution
1
from which the trial-by-trial probability estimate of a valid cue/action is
derived. This level is governed by the level above (x (t)). The pace at which this
2
second level changes is governed by the third and final level above (x (t)) as
3
well as a subject-specific fixed parameter . The step size at which the third
2
level changes is governed by a second subject-specific parameter (denoted
ω 3
as in earlier implementations of the HGF (Mathys et al., 2014; Vossel et al.,
ω
2014)). Both the second and third level change as a random Gaussian walk. Said
𝜗
differently, reflects the speed of belief updating about trial-by-trial cue/
2
action validity, while reflects the speed at which the stability of action/cue
ω 3
validity is updated.
ω
Subject-specific beliefs about trial-by-trial cue/action validity and
volatility (posterior densities in relation to the hidden states x(t)) are inferred
from observable behavior (measured RT) by inverting the perceptual model.
The sufficient statistics of the subject-specific posterior beliefs are denoted by
(t) (mean), (t) (variance), and (t) = 1 / t) (precision).
The response model captures how a( n agent’s belief translates to a decision
𝜇 𝜎 𝜋 𝜎
(Daunizeau et al., 2010), or more specifically how the probability estimate at the
118
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
first level (x(t)) translates to response speed. The response model comprises
1
two parameters and which reflect the intercept and slope, respectively, of
1 2
the linear relationship between the attentional factor and posterior belief
𝜁 𝜁
(see Figure 2). This attentional factor reflects a proportion of attentional
1 α
resources allocated to one of two stimulus locations. Three response models
𝜇
were defined by Vossel and colleagues (2014) which differed in how was
computed: 1) a “belief” model in which RS is a linear function of the probability
α
estimate at x(t), 2) a “precision” model where was determined by a sigmoid
1
transformation (s) of (t), the precision of the prediction at the first level (H.
α
Feldman & Friston, 2010; Vossel, Mathys, et al., 2014), and 3) a “surprise” model
𝜋
where is a nonlinear function of Shannon surprise (Bestmann et al., 2008;
Vossel, Mathys, et al., 2014). See Figure 3 for the relationship between and the
α
probability estimate at the first level. Out of these three models, we selected
1 α
the most likely one given our data through Bayesian model selection (Stephan
𝜇
et al., 2009).
5
Figure 3. The relationship between attentional factor and posterior belief for all three re-
1
sponse models. Adapted from Vossel and colleagues (2014).
α 𝜇
119
Chapter 5
5.4. Results
Pilot
For the pilot, 22.9% of data was excluded from further analyses. Similar to
Vossel et al (2014), 19.3% of trials were excluded because the saccade started
more than 1° from fixation, 1.1% because saccadic RT was smaller than 90 ms,
1.8% due to less than two-thirds of the distance being traversed to one of either
target locations, .09% because no saccade was detected, .4% because trials
consisted of more than 20% missing values, and .19% due to incorrect trials.
Eye movement behavior
Our pilot study aimed to verify that like increasing external cue validity (Vossel
et al., 2014), increasing the predictability of an action outcome would induce
a larger RS cost when this prediction was violated. This was confirmed by our
pilot data. The 3 (Probability; 88/69/50%) x 2 (Validity; valid/invalid) repeated-
measures ANOVA yielded a main effect of Probability (F = 4.6, p = .023,
(1.7,30.8)
2 = .05, BF = 5.4), reflecting overall slower responses in higher probability
incl
blocks. In terms of a main effect of Validity participants were slower for invalid
η
compared to valid trials (F = 31.6, p < .001, 2 = .39, BF > 100), and the
(1,18) incl
interaction between Probability and Validity was also significant (F = 8.9,
η (1.3,24.3)
p = .003, 2 = .048, BF = 7.9), reflecting that participants were slower in higher
incl
probability blocks in particular in invalid trials (see Figure 4). Thus, in our Pilot
η
study, we were able to replicate the main finding by Vossel and colleagues (2014)
in the context of internally generated predictions as well.
Figure 4. Eye movement results for the pilot study. Reaction speed across probability conditions
split by valid and invalid trials (a), and the RT difference between valid and invalid trials in
milliseconds (b). This figure shows that as the probability of a valid trial increased, the RT cost
of a violated internally-generated expectation became larger.
120
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
HGF
In line with Vossel and colleagues (2014), we compared the three different
response models by which the probability estimate for action validity could
be transformed into RS using Bayesian model selection (Stephan et al., 2009).
Rather than the precision response model, we found the belief response model
to be most likely based on the protected exceedance probability (precision = .014,
belief = .977, surprise = .01). The Bayes Omnibus Risk suggested all three models
were not equally likely (p = .029). As can be seen in Figure 5, the trajectories
for the averaged Bayesian parameters fit the presented validity evolution
reasonably well. Thus, while for Vossel and colleagues (2014), the precision
response model fitted best, in our case the optimal relationship between
the allocation of attentional resources and predictability is a linear one. The
question is whether this difference is specific to our action version of the
experiment. To answer this question, we turn to our main experiment in which
we directly contrast internally generated predictions through actions with
externally induced predictions by cues. 5
Figure 5. Trajectories for all three HGF levels derived from the averaged parameters belonging
to the “belief” response model based on the Pilot data. The lowest panel shows the trial-by-trial
probability estimate (red) against the actual probability blocks (black). It shows how the model
successfully estimates and tracks the real probability relationship between action/cue and stim-
ulus location.
121
Chapter 5
Main experiment
Similar to Vossel et al (2014), in total 21.6% of data was excluded from further
analyses. 15.8% of trials were excluded because the saccade started more than
1° from fixation, 2.6% because saccadic RT was smaller than 90 ms, 2.1% due
to less than two-thirds of the distance being traversed to one of either target
locations, .53% because no saccade was detected, .26% because trials consisted
of more than 20% missing values, and .16% due to incorrect trials.
Eye movement behavior
We first determined whether participants were overall faster on valid trials.
The 3 (Probability; 88/69/50%) x 2 (Validity; valid/invalid) x 2 (Expectation;
action-/cue-induced) repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a significant
main effect of Validity (F = 59.3, p < .001, 2 = .15, BF > 100), reflecting
(1,24) incl
faster responses (higher RS) for valid compared to invalid trials. In addition,
η
contrary to our preregistered prediction, participants became slower in higher
probability blocks (F = 3.2, p = .048, 2 = .005, BF = .08). A third main effect
(2,48) incl
of Expectation indicated that participants were overall slower in the action
η
compared to the cue condition (F = 6.3, p = .019, 2 = .14, BF > 100).
(1,24) incl
We expected to find that expectations stemming from self-initiated actions
η
would induce a larger reaction-time cost when violated compared to externally-
cued expectations. Yet, the predicted significant three-way interaction
between Probability, Validity, and Expectation was only trend level significant
(F = 2.9, p = .066, 2 = .002, BF = .15) (see Figure 6). We also did not find
(2,48) incl
an interaction between Validity and Expectation (F = 2.7, p = .12, 2 = .002,
η (1,24)
BF = .26). The same was true for the interaction between Probability and
incl η
Validity, which was also trend-level significant (F = 2.6, p = .089, 2 = .002,
(2,48)
BF = .1). Thus, while we found a pattern of findings in the expected direction,
incl η
it was not statistically robust.
122
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
5
Figure 6. Eye movement results for the main experiment. Reaction speed across action/cue
validity (AV/CV) conditions and split by a) valid and invalid trials, b) the same results but nor-
malized to account for the overall difference in RS between the action and cue condition, and
the reaction time difference between valid and invalid trials in milliseconds for the c) action
and d) cue condition. While the RT cost for violated predictions is larger for 88% compared to
50% probability blocks in both conditions, we don’t find a consistent gradual increase in the cue
condition as a function of cue validity.
Control analyses
We did not expect to find an effect of session order concerning whether the
action or cue condition was completed first, but this expectation did not hold
up. While we did not find a between-subject effect of Order (F = .34, p = .57,
(1.23)
2 = .009, BF = .56), we did find a number of interactions. The interaction
incl
between Order and Expectation indicated that participants were faster in the
η
cue session if they completed the action session first, but if the cue condition
was completed first there was no difference (F = 4.7, p = .041, 2 = .034, BF
(2,23) incl
> 100). Order interacted with Probability in that participants were slower in 88%
η
probability blocks if they completed the action session first, while they were
fastest in 50% probability blocks when the cue session was completed first.
(F = 6.5, p = .003, 2 = .003, BF = .29). We also found a three-way interaction
(2,46) incl
between Probability, Expectation, and Order (F = 3.7, p = .03, 2 = .002,
η (2,46)
η
123
Chapter 5
BF = .21), where participants were faster for all probabilities in the cue session
incl
only if they had already completed the action session. This difference between
sessions across probabilities was absent if the cue session was completed first.
Finally, we found a four-way interaction between Probability, Expectation,
Validity, and Order (F = 3.3, p = .045, 2 > .001, BF = .12), reflecting an
(2,46) incl
enhanced three-way interaction between Probability, Expectation, and Validity
η
if the action session was completed first. The task results outside Session Order
reported above did not change in a meaningful way in this model. Given the
relatively small sample size for this between-subject Order analysis, and the
unexpected direction of some of the Order effects observed, it is unclear how
to weigh these results.
In line with Vossel and colleagues (2014), but in addition to our
preregistration, we conducted a control analysis for Time, in which we added a
within-subject factor contrasting the first and second half of each session. This
analysis yielded a main effect of Time (F = 102.6, p < .001, 2 = .25, BF > 100),
(1,24) incl
reflecting faster responses in the second half. Time interacted with Probability
η
(F = 30, p < .001, 2 = .02, BF = .2), to the point that participants were slower
(2,48) incl
in 88% probability blocks in the first half compared to lower probability blocks,
η
but they were faster in 88% probability blocks in the second half. Finally, we
found a three-way interaction between Time, Probability, and Expectation
(F = 5, p = .01, 2 = .004, BF = .002), in that the difference in response time
(2,48) incl
between the first and second half was larger for the action session, in particular
η
for 50% and 88% probability blocks.
HGF
As to our Bayesian modelling results, we expected to replicate Vossel and
colleagues (2014) in terms of the optimal response model (“precision”), in the
cue as well as the action condition, although our pilot results identified the
belief response model as the optimal response model for the action condition.
For the action condition, Bayesian model selection indeed revealed that the
precision response model was most likely (protected exceedance probability;
precision = .34, belief = .32, surprise = .33), but the Bayes Omnibus Risk was
sufficiently high (p = .91) to suggest that the three response models did not
differ in a meaningful way. For the cue condition the belief response model
came out on top (protected exceedance probability; precision = .29, belief = .48,
surprise = .23), but in this case as well, the Bayes Omnibus Risk did not suggest
a meaningful difference between models (p = .69).
We selected the parameters from the best model (precision for action
condition, belief for cue condition) to establish whether belief updating differed
124
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
under the influence of externally generated cues versus internally generated
actions. Specifically, we compared the subject-specific parameters and
reflecting the speed of trial-wise belief updating concerning cue/action validity
ω 𝜗
( ) and the belief about the volatility of cue/action validity ( ). We expected
participants to showcase a lower value in the cue condition, reflecting slower
ω 𝜗
updating of predictions. Yet, contrary to our expectation a paired-samples t-test
ω
did not reveal a difference between the cue and action condition for (t = 1.1,
2 (24)
p = .28, d = .003, BF = .03). However, we did find that participants believed
10 ω
volatility was higher in the action condition as reflected by (t = 2.7, p = .01,
3 (24)
d = .3, BF = 3.9).
10 ω
Explorative analysis
To account for the unexpected effects of (session) Order reported above, and
to stick close to the original study by Vossel and colleagues (2014) in which
participants only participated in one session of the cue condition, we conducted
additional analyses in which we regarded the first session separately. Said 5
differently, we regarded the first session as a between-subject study in which
one group (n = 10) completed the cue session, while another group completed
the action session (n = 15) to examine if we could replicate Vossel and colleagues
(2014) with this more similar design.
Eye movement behavior. The 3 (Probability; 88/69/50%) x 2 (Validity;
valid/invalid) x 2 (Expectation; action-/cue-induced) mixed ANOVA did
reveal, as can be seen in Figure 7, the expected three-way interaction between
Probability, Validity, and Expectation (F = 4, p = .044, 2 = .004, BF = 5),
(1.3,31) incl
reflecting that self-generated predictions through actions incurred a larger
η
reaction time cost in particular in the high probability condition. Moreover,
a trend-level significant between-subject main effect of Expectation was
observed (F = 3.7, p =.068, 2 = .11, BF = 68.9). Within-subject main effects
(1,23) incl
were similar to the original analyses above: responses were slower in higher
η
probability blocks (F = 5, p = .019, 2 = .007, BF = 6.8) and on invalid trials
(1.5,35.2) incl
(F = 46.7, p < .001, 2 = .066, BF > 100). We furthermore found a significant
(1,23) incl η
interaction between Probability and Expectation (F = 7.3, p = .004, 2 = .001,
η (1.5,35.2)
BF = 16.8), reflecting that only in the action condition, participants became
incl η
slower in higher probability blocks. The interaction between Validity and
Expectation was also significant (F = 5.4, p = .029, 2 = .008, BF = 47.1),
(1,23) incl
reflecting a larger reduction in response time for valid vs. invalid trials in the
η
action condition. We did not find a significant interaction between Probability
and Validity (F = 1.7, p = .2, 2 = .002, BF = 1.4). Thus, when we look solely
(1.3,31) incl
at the first session, we find that violation of predictions through invalid trials
η
125
Chapter 5
incurred a larger reaction time cost when a prediction stems from action rather
than from a sensory cue, in particular under high probability conditions.
Figure 7. Eye movement results for only the first session of the main experiment.
Figure 7. Eye movement results for only the first session of the main experiment. Reaction speed
Reaction speed a) across probability conditions and split by valid and invalid trials, b)
a) across probability conditions and split by valid and invalid trials, b) the same results but nor-
the same results but normalized, and the reaction time difference between valid and
malized, and the reaction time difference between valid and invalid trials in milliseconds for the
c) ainctviaolnid a ntrdi a d ls) cinu em ciolnlidseitcioonn.d Ts hfeo rR tTh ec ocs)t afoctri ovnio laantedd d p)r ecduiec tcioonnsd iitsi olanr.g Terh efo Rr 8T8 %co scto mfopr ared
to 5v0io%la pterdo bparbeidliictyti obnlosc ikss l ainrg tehre faocrt i8o8n% c ocnodmitpioanre, db utot t5h0i%s d pifrfoebreanbcilei tiys bplroaccktisc ainll yth aeb ascetniot nin the
cuec ocnodnidtiitoinon, .but this difference is practically absent in the cue condition.
HGF. We repeated the procedure to select the best response model for the first
HGF. We repeated the procedure to select the best response model for the
session only. For the action condition, the surprise response model was most likely
first session only. For the action condition, the surprise response model was
(protected exceedance probability; precision = .32, belief = .32, surprise = .35), but there
most likely (protected exceedance probability; precision = .32, belief = .32,
was again little indication to assume the difference between these models was meaningful
suasr prerfilseect e=d . 3b5y) ,t hbeu Bta tyhese rOem wniabsu sa Rgaisikn ( pli t=t .l8e7 i)n. Fdoicr athteio cnu et oco andsistuiomn Be atyheesi adni fmfeordeenl ce
besetlwecetieonn stuhgegseest emd othdee blse liwefa ms omdeela wnaisn gagfauiln abse srt e(pflreoctetcetedd beyx ctehedea nBcaey perso bOambilnityib; us
Rpisrekc i(spio =n =.8 .73)6., Fboelri etfh =e . 4c1u,e s ucropnridsei t=i o.2n3 )B, abuyte tshiea Bna myeos dOeml nsiebluesc rtisiok nh esrue gtogoe dsitde ndo tthe
suggest a meaningful difference (p = .68)
belief model was again best (protected exceedance probability; precision = .36,
We once again took the subject-specific parameters ω and from the winning
belief = .41, surprise = .23), but the Bayes Omnibus risk here too did not suggest
models to compare them between the cue and action condition. An independent samples
a meaningful difference (p = .68) 𝜗𝜗
t-test did not reveal a difference for either ω2(t(23)= .83, p = .42, d = .34, BF10= .48) or
ω3(t(23)= .25, p = .8, d = .1, BF10= .38). Thus, when controlling for time by reducing our
analyses to only the Session 1 data, our modelling results did not change in a meaningful
way.
126
98
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
We once again took the subject-specific parameters and from the
winning models to compare them between the cue and action condition. An
ω 𝜗
independent samples t-test did not reveal a difference for either (t = .83,
2 (23)
p = .42, d = .34, BF = .48) or (t = .25, p = .8, d = .1, BF = .38). Thus, when
10 3 (23) 10 ω
controlling for time by reducing our analyses to only the Session 1 data, our
ω
modelling results did not change in a meaningful way.
Controlling for time. For the first session only as well, and in line with
Vossel and colleagues (2014), we controlled for differences between the first
and second half of the experiment by including a within-subject factor Time
in our ANOVA. This resulted in a 2 (Time; first/second half) x 3 (Probability;
88/69/50%) x 2 (Validity; valid/invalid) x 2 (Expectation; action-/cue-induced)
mixed ANOVA. Participants were again significantly faster in the second half of
the session compared to the first half (F = 82.4, p < .001, 2 = .2, BF > 100).
(1,23) incl
Time interacted with Probability (F = 19.2, p < .001, 2 = .02, BF > 100):
(1.8,43.1) η incl
responses became slower with higher probability blocks, but only in the first
η
half of the session. Time did not interact with other variables (all p > .12). Said 5
differently, unlike Vossel and colleagues, we still found differences between
the first and second half of the experiment, but these did not differ between
the action and cue groups.
5.5. Discussion
In the present study, we addressed the following question: how does the response
to induced predictions and their violation differ when these predictions stem
from externally induced sensory cues compared to internally generated actions?
We hypothesized that self-generated predictions would incur a larger reaction
time cost when violated compared to cue-induced predictions, given that self-
generated predictions allow a system to engage actively in testing and revising
its models instead of being at the whim of the external environment to do so. We
explored this question specifically within the context of predictive processing,
and under the assumption that our participants perform approximate Bayesian
inference. In absolute terms we found supporting evidence for our hypothesis:
participants showcased a larger reaction time difference between valid and
invalid trials in the action condition, particularly for high-probability trials,
but it must be noted that the main 3-way interaction we were after remained at
trend level significance for our main preregistered analyses, and only became
statistically significant once we exploratively isolated the first session to
account for unexpectedly observed session order effects.
127
Chapter 5
In terms of modelling, only in our pilot data were we able to establish a
difference between response models through a significant Bayes Omnibus Risk,
but even then, it was not the “precision” model that was optimal, as we expected
to find based on the study by Vossel and colleagues (2014). In terms of model
parameters, the difference between action and cue conditions was reflected in
the volatility parameter in our main analysesinstead of the hypothesized
3
speed of belief-updating parameter This difference disappeared for our
ω 2.
explorative analysis isolating only the first session, possibly due to the small
ω
groups being compared (N = 10 and N = 15). Overall, if these behavioral and
modelling results are to be believed, it does seem that the larger reaction
time cost induced by the violation of action-induced predictions translates to
participants becoming more sensitive to the volatility of relevant probability
relationships in their surroundings.
A difference between how stimuli stemming from internally generated
and externally induced predictions affect model updating was expected based
on the idea that self-generated predictions are generally afforded more weight
compared to externally induced predictions (H. Brown et al., 2013), because they
allow a system to put its own models to the test, instead of being reliant on
external change in its environment. This idea aligns with the way fine-tuning
of behavior is understood within the context of sensorimotor learning. As in the
case of male songbirds who in a first “sensory” stage store a song-template in
memory, only to put this template to the test in a second “sensorimotor” stage
where they actively but gradually approach the stored template (M. S. Brainard
& Doupe, 2000). In our experiment, the “template” is the intuitive relationship
between a left and right action with a left and right visual effect which is put
to the test repeatedly. A problem with transposing this example to the visual
domain is that it is unclear whether there are anatomical connections directly
connecting the motor cortex to the visual cortex, as is the case for the auditory
cortex (Reznik & Mukamel, 2019). Nevertheless, it could be that such a process
takes place between the motor cortex and more abstract representations such as
“left” and “right” instead of purely visual representations per se. Indeed, such
a proposal would fit with predictive processing accounts of sensory attenuation
where neural responses to predicted stimuli are reduced for aggregated signals
across many neurons, possibly reflecting a sharpening of the relevant neural
representation (Bell et al., 2016; Kok et al., 2012; Press et al., 2020; Reznik &
Mukamel, 2019), especially when predictions are self-generated (H. Brown et al.,
2013; Korka et al., 2019, 2022). It is possible that increased sensitivity to violation
for self-generated predictions comes from increased sharpening given that
self-generated predictions are weighted more heavily by the system in question.
128
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
Several limitations pertain to the present study. Unlike Vossel and
colleagues (2014), we found an effect of Time we did not hypothesize:
participants were faster in the second half of the experiment compared to the
first. One difference between our and the original study is that ours took longer
to complete. Whereas Vossel and colleagues report their experiment lasting 35
minutes (p. 1442), ours took over an hour on average to complete. In the original
study, the authors report allowing one and four short rest periods across their
two datasets, which were increased from the first to the second to increase data
quality. With this in mind, we allowed for eight short rest periods, which will
have lengthened our experiment. More importantly however, participants in the
study by Vossel and colleagues (2014) responded faster and made more errors
(~5% vs < 1%). This difference may indicate a difference in speed-accuracy
tradeoff between the studies. As such, future research should emphasize
speed over accuracy in attempted replications like these. More practice trials
may reduce the time effect as well by eliminating task familiarization during
experimental trials. 5
We also found a session order effect we did not hypothesize. Participants’
performance was faster in the cue session after completing the action session
first, while participants were not faster in the action session after having
completed the cue session first. Apparently, a task like this is learned more
readily in the cue condition. This makes intuitive sense because the cue condition
required less from participants. In the cue session, participants merely had to
sit still and move their eyes to the target when it appeared, whereas in the
action session they also had to choose an action every single trial. We chose a
within-subject design to exploit the increase in statistical power and reduction
in random noise these designs are privy to, but given these order effects, it may
be better to opt for a between-subject design in future research. Care should be
taken in recruiting enough participants given that even with our within-subject
design, our effects of interest remained at trend level.
In addition to the limitations that pertain to our basic behavioral results,
we were unable to replicate the modelling results by Vossel and colleagues
(2014). The difference resides in the best fitting response model, which stands
for the way the trial-by-trial probability of cue or action validity is transposed
to response speed through the computation of the attentional factor . In the
original study this transposition was best governed by precision ( (t)) in line
α
with the proposal by Feldman and Friston (2010), but in our case only for our
𝜋
pilot data did we find a clear winning model (“belief”). While the behavioral
limitations discussed above may have contributed to these ambiguous
modelling results, there are additional angles to consider. Whereas extensive
129
Chapter 5
model comparison was performed in the original study (Vossel, Mathys, et al.,
2014), in subsequent studies employing the same task an optimal “precision”
response model is assumed without repeated model comparisons for these new
datasets (Vossel, Bauer, et al., 2014; Vossel et al., 2015), while in other work with
different attention tasks, it was not the “precision” but the “belief” model that
fitted best (Dombert et al., 2016; Kuhns et al., 2017). It’s possible that the tasks
used were sufficiently different to warrant a different optimal response model,
but it is also possible that the model fitting procedure is not as robust as we
may desire. The Vossel et al. (2014) study had an even smaller sample size than
the current study, which may have led to less robust results. Future research
would do well to elucidate under what conditions different response models fit
best with larger samples sizes. Perhaps a better modelling approach altogether
to test the current research question would be one in which the difference is
considered between perceptual and active inference, as they’ve been theorized
to optimize two separate free energy functionals (Parr & Friston, 2019).
While the present study leaves room for improvement in experimental
design, the results we report nevertheless uphold the importance of considering
the difference between prediction of self-generated and externally imposed
stimuli, especially within the context of predictive processing. While both
perception and action serve the same goal: the minimization of prediction error
or free energy (Clark, 2013; Friston, 2010; Hohwy, 2013), it seems likely that self-
generated predictions are afforded more weight by the generating system. It
may be worth considering letting go of some experimental control for the sake
of an inside-out perspective.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Simone Vossel for helpful modelling guidance.
130
Self- versus externally produced prediction violations
5
131
Chapter 6
Summary and general discussion
Chapter 6
The present dissertation took the free-energy principle (FEP) as its starting
point, from which we tried to draw both philosophical and empirical
consequences. The attempt to depart from a new starting point comes with a
dilemma. The disadvantage of doing something entirely new is that it may be
hard to do justice to and link up with previous research. When we do decide to
link up with what’s done before, we run the risk of inadvertently remaining
stuck in the old point of departure. For our empirical work presented in chapter 2
and 3 we nevertheless opted for the latter, presenting stimuli to our participants
to which they had to respond. This allowed us to determine the role of the basal
ganglia and its irrigation by dopamine in the process of perceptual inference.
Both chapter 2 and 3 departed from the idea that conscious perception depends
on global amplification of sensory input, and that the basal ganglia (BG) and
its irrigation by dopamine play a crucial role in gating information, conscious
access, and the selection of a relevant internal model given available sensory
data. The BG are thought to play this role due to their modulatory influence
on thalamocortical connectivity. Because much of the evidence implicating
the BG in these processes in humans is correlational, we explored two ways of
manipulating BG activity experimentally.
Chapter 2 describes a double-blind crossover pharmacological study in
which we administered cabergoline – a dopamine D2 agonist – and placebo to 30
healthy participants. Dopamine D2 receptors are abundant in the basal ganglia,
specifically in the striatum. We reasoned that striatal dopamine may influence
the contents of consciousness by controlling which ‘internal model’ or one
interpretation of the current sensory state dominates perceptual experience.
Under both the drug and placebo condition, we subjected participants to several
well-established experimental conscious-perception paradigms, such as
backward masking and the attentional blink task. We found no evidence in
support of an effect of cabergoline on conscious perception: key behavioral and
event-related potential (ERP) findings associated with each of these tasks were
unaffected by cabergoline. Our results cast doubt on a causal role for dopamine
in visual perception. It remains an open possibility that dopamine has causal
effects in other tasks, perhaps where perceptual uncertainty is more prominent,
or where participants are actively involved in generating their percepts.
Chapter 3 reports on a preliminary investigation in four patients to explore
whether deep brain stimulation (DBS) in the BG might improve conscious
perception. In our study, treatment-resistant obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD) patients with a striatal DBS implant completed two canonical conscious
perception tasks: emotion-induced blindness and backward masking. We
134
Summary and general discussion
found preliminary evidence in support of a role played by the BG in conscious
perception at the behavioral level: patients performed better when stimulation
was active, but we could not establish neural effects corresponding to these
behavioral findings, possibly due to our small sample size.
Chapter 4 investigates the philosophical heritage implicitly touched on by the
FEP, which provides an alternative philosophical and historical background for
present-day research in cognitive neuroscience. Friston’s FEP has been received
with great enthusiasm. With good reason: it not only makes the bold claim to a
unifying theory of the brain, but it is presented as an a priori principle applicable
to living systems in general. In this paper, we set out to show how the breadth
of scope of Friston’s framework converges with the dialectics of Georg Hegel.
Through an appeal to the work of Catherine Malabou, we aimed to demonstrate
how Friston not only reinvigorates Hegelian dialectics from the perspective of
neuroscience, but that the implicit alignment with Hegel necessitates a reading
of the FEP from the perspective of Hegel’s speculative philosophy. It is this
reading that moves beyond the discussion between cognitivism and enactivism
surrounding Friston’s framework; beyond the question whether the organism is
6
a secluded entity separated from its surroundings, or whether it is a dynamical
system characterized by perpetual openness and mutual exchange. From a
Hegelian perspective, it is the tension between both positions itself that is
operative at the level of the organism; as a contradiction the organism sustains
over the course of its life. Not only does the organism’s secluded existence
depend on a perpetual relation with its surroundings, but the condition for there
to be such a relation is the existence of a secluded entity. We intended to show
how this contradiction – tension internalized – is at the center of Friston’s
anticipatory organism; how it is this contradiction that grounds the perpetual
process of free energy minimization.
Chapter 5 is the report of a study attempting to contrast the FEP’s
perspective with that of traditional cognitive neuroscience. While the FEP
casts the brain as an organism’s predictive model of how its world works and
will continue to work in the future in which action is afforded a central place,
research on the brain’s predictive capacities remains beholden to traditional
research practices in which participants are passively shown stimuli without
their active involvement (as we also did in Chapters 2 and 3). The current study
is an investigation into ways in which self-generated predictions may differ
from externally induced predictions. Participants completed a volatile spatial
attention task under both conditions (externally/cue-induced, internally/
action-induced) on different days. We used the Hierarchical Gaussian Filter,
135
Chapter 6
an approximate Bayesian inference model, to determine subject-specific
parameters of belief-updating and inferred volatility. We found preliminary
evidence in support of self-generated predictions incurring a larger reaction
time cost when violated compared to predictions induced by sensory cue, which
translated to participants’ increased sensitivity to changes in environmental
volatility. Our results suggest that internally generated predictions may be
afforded more weight, but these results are complicated by session order and
duration effects, as well as a lack of statistical power.
The empirical studies reported in this dissertation can be divided into two
themes: the role of the BG in conscious perception (chapter 2 and 3), and
the role of action in perception and belief updating (chapter 5). What these
three chapters share is a lack of clear evidence in support of the hypotheses
under investigation. The (practical) reasons for these inconclusive results are
multiple and can be found in each respective chapter. These results could be
taken as lack of support for the FEP, and by extension as a reason to abandon
the FEP altogether. In my view that would be a mistake. For one, chapters 2
and 3 still took a traditional approach to the study of conscious perception:
participants were presented with stimuli on a computer screen to which
they had to respond. This left little room for effects of participant’s active
involvement in the processes under study. Moreover, all chapters focused on
“cold” cognitive measures, which may not account for the affectively charged
information organisms use to orient themselves in the world. In the remainder
of this section, I would like to consider briefly the possibility that up until now,
we have not thought through the theoretical implications of the FEP far enough,
and that by extension we do not yet have an adequate theoretical orientation
to base our empirical studies on. Instead of reverting away from the FEP back
to the traditional perspective, perhaps we need to take another step further
away from it.
What makes the FEP an appealing framework for cognitive neuroscience
is that it offers an incredibly simple conception of biological systems capturing
little more than what a system must do to keep existing; namely, constrain
the actual states it occupies out of all possible states, or what comes down
to the same imperative: minimize long-term average surprise (or prediction
error). Crucial is that this idea is grounded in modern physics, instead of the
17th century empiricist philosophy of the traditional view.
Broadly speaking, the traditional empiricist view – and by extension a large
portion of cognitive neuroscience research – is focused on (visual) perception
directed at the world outside the perceiving brain in question. Up until now, the
136
Summary and general discussion
FEP has been employed mainly as a justification to shift away from an emphasis
on perception to action (cf. Buzsáki, 2019). The argument to do so is that from
the perspective espoused by the FEP, perception merely serves to inform what
an organism must do to survive. As justifiable as this shift is, what it lacks is
the information needed by the system to inform its actions to stay alive. Such
information is not a matter of perception, but of affect. It is through affect that
a system registers it is departing or has departed from its preferred states in
proximity of homeostasis. Emphasis on affect would allow us to start out from a
system’s internal state in terms of what it lacks, such as food, rest, information,
or whatever else as the main driver of action, which perception facilitates. In
addition to a shift from perception to action, perhaps what we need to fully draw
out the FEP’s implications is a shift from action to affect.
In his 2021 book The Hidden Spring, the neuroscientist and psychoanalyst
Mark Solms employs the FEP in search of ways out of the empiricist view in
relation to how the brain instantiates consciousness:
“The everyday observation that our consciousness consists mainly
of perceptual images of events going on around us suggests that
6
consciousness flows in through the senses. This common-sense view
has no doubt been with us since we first began to think about such
matters. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it gave rise to
the ‘empiricist’ philosophies of John Locke and David Hume. They
theorised that the mind – which begins as a blank slate – acquires all
its specific characteristics from impressions left by sensory vibrations.
The impressions were supposed to become associated with each other
through regular conjunctions of various kinds to produce our memory
images of objects, which in turn became the basic building blocks of more
abstract ideas.” (p. 60-61)
Solms’ alternative to the empiricist view not only includes an inside-
out perspective (cf. Buzsáki, 2019), but he leverages affect to depart from the
dominant view on how to study consciousness. For Solms, an organism is
conscious when it registers its drives, where drives are understood as demands
of the body on the mind for work. Examples include the simple drive to resolve
hunger, uncertainty, correcting to a preferred state of thermoregulation,
avoiding tissue damage (pain), and fatigue, with the possibility of more
complex emotional drives in more complex organisms like humans. Solms
concludes: “Consciousness is endogenously generated; all of it. Consciousness
137
Chapter 6
at its source is affect. Then it is extended outwards onto perception, to evaluate
perceptual inferences […].” (p. 189). Casting consciousness as affective stands
in stark contrast to the perceptual and cognitive theories that predominate
consciousness research (Hohwy & Seth, 2020; Seth & Bayne, 2022).
Perhaps the main limitation of each of our empirical studies – resulting
in our lack of results – is not that we tried to start out from the FEP, but that
we still adhered all too closely to the traditional empiricist view, by resorting
to passive visual perception of arbitrary stimuli as our main process under
investigation. Alternative approaches abound from the perspective of the FEP,
for it raises action, proprioceptive, and interoceptive (affective) inference to
the forefront of biological functioning (Allen et al., 2022; Azzalini et al., 2019;
Pezzulo et al., 2015; Seth & Friston, 2016), alongside passive exteroceptive
inference (perception).
A promising avenue for future research in this regard comes from
active inference, a mathematical derivative of the FEP (Parr et al., 2022; Sajid
et al., 2021). Active inference is a computational framework not only allowing
for modelling of behavioral data, but also for the construction of virtual
agents leveraging affect to motivate the satisfaction of needs and thereby to
maintain approximate homeostasis. It thereby enters into direct competition
with reinforcement learning (RL) schemes that predominate the field of
artificial intelligence (Barto et al., 2013; Sutton & Barto, 1998). In contrast to
RL, active inference provides a Bayesian mechanics from which arguably all
normative optimization schemes can be derived as special cases. For example,
active inference reduces to RL if we ignore uncertainty about hidden states
(Friston et al., 2021). This combination of capturing behavioral modelling and
the construction of virtual agents under the same first-principled umbrella
opens up the possibility of parallelizing the study of active inference in virtual
and actual biological systems. For example by constructing an environment
for virtual agents which can be transposed to a virtual reality setting for actual
biological systems (human or animal)(Anggraini et al., 2018). The combination
of computational rigor together with the possibilities of virtual world-building
may be what the field of cognitive neuroscience needs not only to shed its
empiricist baggage, but to turn it into a field capable of doing justice to what
human brains and bodies are capable of.
138
Summary and general discussion
6
139
Chapter 7
Nederlandse samenvatting
Chapter 7
Hoe verwerkt het brein informatie? Wat doet het brein? Terwijl beide vragen
in dezelfde richting wijzen, stelt het verschil tussen beiden het thema scherp
waar het in deze dissertatie mede om gaat. Het beeld van het brein als passieve
verwerker van informatie staat onder druk. De hedendaagse neurowetenschap
biedt een nieuw beeld. Met het vrije-energie principe (VEP) [free-energy
principle] van de Britse psychiater en natuurkundige Karl Friston verschijnt het
brein als een habitueel verwachtingsmodel dat actief deelneemt in haar eigen
vormgeving: dat doet. In plaats van een orgaan geketend aan invloeden van
buiten is het brein een structuur die uitstaat naar buiten en naar de toekomst, op
basis van zowel een evolutionair, cultureel als individueel verleden. Het belang
van dit nieuwe breinbeeld is tweeledig.
Minimale vrije-energie minimalisatie
Ten eerste biedt het een raamwerk van waaruit we een begin kunnen maken
biologische systemen in hun geheel te begrijpen en wetenschappelijk te
bestuderen. Als we het vrije-energie principe terugbrengen tot de essentie,
dan staan drie hoofdpunten centraal. Het VEP vertrekt vanuit de aanname dat
een biologisch systeem een begrenzing in stand houdt tussen zichzelf en de
buitenwereld. Doet het dat niet, dan zou een dergelijk systeem spoedig opgaan in
zijn omgeving en daarmee ophouden te bestaan. Anders gezegd: geen minimale
begrenzing, geen biologisch systeem.
Ten tweede houdt een biologisch systeem een dergelijke begrenzing in
stand door ervoor te zorgen dat het een beperkt aantal toestanden inneemt
uit alle mogelijke toestanden die het mogelijkerwijs in kan nemen. Ons
lichaam doet niet anders gedurende de dag door zorg te dragen dat zaken zoals
lichaamstemperatuur en bloedsuikerspiegel niet buiten bepaalde grenzen
raken. Als ons biologisch systeem hier niet in zou slagen, dan zouden we spoedig
sterven. Ditzelfde proces kunnen we generaliseren naar processen die minder
noodzakelijk zijn voor ons directe voortbestaan, zoals processen gebaseerd op
voorkeuren wat betreft informatievoorziening en emotionele behoeften. Zo zijn
sommige mensen bijvoorbeeld toleranter wat betreft onzekerheid dan anderen.
Het derde hoofdpunt betreft Bayesiaanse statistiek en in het bijzonder
de manier waarop de beperking van in te nemen mogelijke toestanden onder
bepaalde voorwaarden wiskundig gezien equivalent is aan het maximaliseren
van bewijs voor een Bayesiaans model. Het idee is dat biologische systemen
al dan niet impliciet een vorm van Bayesiaanse gevolgtrekking [inference]
voltrekken. Deze vorm van statistiek combineert de a priori waarschijnlijkheid
van nieuwe data en de aannemelijkheid [likelihood] van deze data gegeven
142
Nederlandse samenvatting
een model, om te komen tot de a posteriori waarschijnlijkheid van de data in
kwestie. Of het brein Bayesiaanse gevolgtrekking belichaamt is vooralsnog een
open vraag die meer onderzoek vergt, maar een mogelijke werking is dat het
receptief veld van neuronen – de data waar neuronen op vuren – neerkomt op
de waarschijnlijkheid van de data waar ze aan blootgesteld worden. Het VEP
stelt dat het brein niet een model van haar omgeving heeft, maar een model
van haar wereld is. Dit betekent dat eerdere ervaringen en het verleden inherent
verbonden is met de manier waarop het brein waarneemt en handelt.
Vrije energie is de kwantiteit die het biologisch systeem in haar geheel
heeft te minimaliseren om te kunnen voorspellen hoe haar omgeving
werkt en verandert, en uiteindelijk om te blijven bestaan. Onder bepaalde
aannames is de minimalisatie van vrije energie gelijk aan de minimalisatie
van voorspellingsfout [prediction error]: het verschil tussen de voorspellingen
die voortkomen uit het neurale Bayesiaanse model en de data waar het model
zich geconfronteerd mee ziet. Er zijn meerdere manieren waarop het systeem
poogt dit verschil te minimaliseren. De eerste manier is via waarneming, door
deze aan te passen aan de nieuwe data. De tweede manier is via actie, door te
handelen en de data in kwestie te veranderen. Stel je wandelt buiten op een
mistige ochtend en je ziet iets in de verte zonder precies te kunnen uitmaken
wat je ziet. Een mogelijkheid is te concluderen dat het wel een verkeersbord
7
moet zijn (waarneming). Een andere mogelijkheid is om te handelen door je
dichterbij datgene wat je ziet te begeven en zo je onzekerheid te verminderen.
Waarneming en actie zijn twee manieren om vrije energie te minimaliseren
aan de zintuigelijke randen van het systeem. Wat het systeem ook doet is het
model offline optimaliseren door te dromen en daarmee mogelijke scenario’s te
simuleren en uit te werken. Online is er ook de mogelijkheid van de verbeelding,
door in wakkere toestand mogelijke scenario’s te doordenken. De mate waarin
een biologisch systeem in staat is tot verbeelding hangt af van hoe complex
het biologische systeem in kwestie is. Mensen zijn wat dat betreft tot meer in
staat dan eencelligen.
Deze drie hoofdpunten tezamen maken van het VEP een op de moderne
natuurkunde geïnformeerd startpunt om na te denken over biologische
systemen in het algemeen, en de hersenen in het bijzonder. Bezien vanuit het VEP
is het een brein een voorspellend model dat ons in staat stelt onszelf te begeven
in de wereld om ons heen op basis van ons individuele en gemeenschappelijke
verleden. Dergelijke systemen onderhouden een eigen interne dynamiek op
basis waarvan ze opereren, in de voortdurende poging het model dat ze zijn af
te stemmen op een omgeving die al dan niet verandert.
143
Chapter 7
Empirische exploraties
Een radicaal nieuw vertrekpunt zoals de VEP gaat gepaard met een dilemma
wat betreft nieuw empirisch onderzoek dat dit vertrekpunt tot uitgangspunt wil
nemen. Doe je iets volstrekt nieuws of probeer je aansluiting te vinden bij eerder
onderzoek, ondanks dat dit eerdere onderzoek een ander vertrekpunt had? Het
nadeel van iets volstrekt nieuws is dat het moeilijk is om in gesprek te gaan met
en recht te doen aan eerder onderzoek. Aansluiten bij eerder onderzoek brengt
het risico met zich mee dat je onbedoeld blijft hangen in het oude vertrekpunt.
Desondanks hebben we in de empirische hoofdstukken 2, 3 en 5 gekozen voor
het laatste.
Bewuste waarneming
Zowel hoofdstuk 2 als 3 gingen uit van het idee dat bewuste waarneming
afhangt van globale versterking van zintuiglijke input, en dat de basale
ganglia (BG) een cruciale rol spelen in het verheffen van deze informatie tot
bewustzijn, oftewel in de selectie van een relevant intern model gegeven de
beschikbare zintuiglijke data. Men denkt dat de BG deze rol vervullen door hun
modulerende invloed op de thalamocorticale connectiviteit. Omdat veel van het
bewijsmateriaal dat de BG bij deze processen betrekt correlationeel van aard is,
met name bij de bestudering van mensen, hebben we twee manieren onderzocht
om BG-activiteit experimenteel te manipuleren.
Hoofdstuk 2 beschrijft een dubbelblinde cross-over farmacologische studie
waarin we cabergoline - een dopamine D2 agonist - en placebo toedienden
aan 30 gezonde jongvolwassenen. Onder beide condities onderwierpen we deze
deelnemers aan verschillende welbekende experimentele taken gericht op de
bestudering van bewuste perceptie, zoals achterwaartse maskering [backward
masking] en de aandachts-knipper [attentional blink] taak. Wij vonden geen
bewijs voor een effect van cabergoline op bewuste waarneming: de belangrijkste
gedragsbevindingen en elektro-encefalografie bevindingen voor elk van deze
taken werden niet beïnvloed door cabergoline. Onze resultaten doen twijfel
rijzen over een oorzakelijke rol van dopamine in visuele waarneming. Het
zou kunnen dat cabergoline niet het juiste middel is om een dergelijke rol
aan te tonen. Ook is het een mogelijkheid dat het causale effect van dopamine
in de waarneming is weggelegd voor taken waarin perceptuele onzekerheid
prominenter aanwezig is of het brein zelf zijn input genereert door middel van
actie.
Hoofdstuk 3 doet verslag van een preliminair onderzoek met een kleine
groep van vier deelnemers om te onderzoeken of diepe hersenstimulatie
[deep brain stimulation] (DBS) in de BG bewuste waarneming verbetert. In
144
Nederlandse samenvatting
deze studie voerden behandelingsresistente obsessieve-compulsieve stoornis
(OCD) patiënten met een striatale DBS-implantaat twee canonieke taken uit
op het gebied van bewuste waarneming: emotie-geïnduceerde blindheid en
achterwaartse maskering. We vonden preliminair bewijs voor een rol van de
basale ganglia in bewuste waarneming op gedragsniveau: patiënten presteerden
beter wanneer de stimulatie aanstond, maar we konden geen neurale effecten
vaststellen die overeenkwamen met deze gedragsbevindingen, mogelijk door
onze kleine steekproefgrootte. Aan het eind van het hoofdstuk bespreken we
mogelijke implicaties en beperkingen van onze studie en schetsen we wegen
voor toekomstig onderzoek.
Waarnemen naar handelen
Hoofdstuk 5 is het verslag van een onderzoek waarin we hebben getracht het
perspectief van het FEP af te zetten tegen dat van de traditionele cognitieve
neurowetenschappen. Terwijl de FEP de hersenen beschouwt als het
voorspellende model van een organisme met betrekking tot hoe zijn wereld
werkt en zal blijven werken in de toekomst waarbinnen actie een centrale plaats
krijgt toebedeeld, blijft onderzoek naar de voorspellende capaciteiten van de
hersenen gebonden aan traditionele onderzoekspraktijken waarin deelnemers
passief stimuli te zien krijgen zonder hun actieve betrokkenheid. Deze studie
7
is een onderzoek naar manieren waarop zelfgegenereerde voorspellingen
verschillen van extern geïnduceerde voorspellingen. Deelnemers voltooiden
een volatiele ruimtelijke aandachtstaak onder beide condities op verschillende
dagen. We gebruikten een Bayesiaans inferentiemodel om deelnemer-specifieke
parameters van belief-updating en ingeschatte volatiliteit te bepalen. We
vonden enig bewijs dat de schending van zelfgegenereerde voorspellingen
meer reactietijd kost in vergelijking met de schending van voorspellingen
die door een sensorische cue worden opgewekt. Dit verschil vertaalde zich
naar een verhoogde gevoeligheid van de deelnemers voor veranderingen in
omgevingsvolatiliteit. Onze resultaten suggereren dat intern gegenereerde
voorspellingen meer gewicht krijgen, maar deze resultaten worden
gecompliceerd door sessievolgorde- en duureffecten, alsmede een gebrek aan
statistische power. In Hoofdstuk 5 bespreken we de beperkingen van onze
studie die ons verhinderden eerder onderzoek te repliceren, en manieren om
deze tekortkomingen te verhelpen in toekomstige studies.
Filosofische verkenning
Naast de nieuwe empirische invalshoeken schuilt het belang van het VEP in
de mogelijkheid om de dynamiek van het brein te doordenken in lijn met de
145
Chapter 7
omwenteling in de moderne filosofie sinds Kant. Zoals met Kant zintuiglijkheid
onderhevig is aan de a-prioristische vormen van het verstand, zo vertrekt
het nieuwe brein vanuit a-prioristische verwachtingsmodellen. Dit is
substantiële vooruitgang ten opzichte van de empiristische inslag (het brein
als passieve informatieverwerker) die het onderzoeksveld van de cognitieve
neurowetenschap tot de op dag van vandaag kenmerkt. De vraag is echter of
Kantiaanse coördinaten ver genoeg gaan om de omwenteling van het VEP recht
te doen. Hoofdstuk 4 is een poging te laten zien hoe het VEP aansluit bij Hegels
natuurfilosofie.
De aanzet van Hegels filosofie is om waarheid te vatten: niet alleen als
substantie, maar ook als subject. Een manier waarop we deze beroemde frase
uit de voorrede van de Fenomenologie van de geest kunnen interpreteren is dat
we datgene wat bestaat niet alleen in haar objectiviteit dienen te begrijpen,
maar dat we tevens recht te doen hebben aan subjectiviteit als onderdeel van
de objectieve werkelijkheid. Het gaat om de manier waarop subjectiviteit zelf
een objectief fenomeen is, zonder het subjectieve te reduceren tot louter
objectiviteit. Anders gezegd, het gaat om de objectiviteit van subjectiviteit; In
zekere zin kunnen we zeggen dat Hegels gehele filosofie erop is toegespitst om
het idee van het objectief bestaande en denkende subject op de spits te drijven.
Hiervoor dienen we af te dalen in de abstracte diepten van ons
voorspellend brein om niet alleen klem te geraken in abstracte bepalingen
die consistente theorie bemoeilijken, maar om uitgerekend dit klemzitten te
verheffen tot theorie, in zoverre dat sommige theoretische inconsistenties
en tegenstrijdigheden niet slechts een tekortkoming van het denken zijn,
maar iets zeggen over datgene wat we pogen te doordenken. Het frappante is
dat uitgerekend Fristons VEP een beroep op de objectiviteit van subjectieve
inconsistenties niet uitsluit, maar impliciet aanmoedigt. Tenslotte, in zoverre
dat het voorspellend brein een afspiegeling is van de wereld waarin wij leven,
zou het dan niet zo kunnen zijn dat de inconsistenties van dit voorspellend
model niet alleen tekortkomingen zijn van het model – van het individuele
brein in kwestie, maar in sommige gevallen daadwerkelijk iets zeggen over de
wereld waarin wij leven; over de wereld die we pogen te bestuderen?
Nu kan het natuurlijk niet zo zijn dat elke tegenstrijdigheid waar we in ons
denken tegenaan lopen blijk geeft van waarheid met betrekking tot datgene
wat we overdenken. Soms zitten we er gewoon gruwelijk naast en schiet ons
denkvermogen tekort. Het punt is dat wanneer we grondig zijn in ons denken,
we zo nu en dan stuiten op onoplosbare tegenstrijdigheden, en dat die wellicht
informatief zijn voor de werking van het object dat we proberen te begrijpen.
De inzet van Hoofdstuk 4 is om gebruik te maken van het grondige denken van
146
Nederlandse samenvatting
anderen rond zowel de open- en geslotenheid als de (on)afhankelijkheid van
biologische systemen onderhevig aan het VEP, in een poging de voortslepende
discussie rond deze tegenstrijdigheden op te laten gaan in een tegenstelling
waar het systeem zelf onderhevig aan is. Deze tegenstelling is de dialectiek van
vrije-energie minimalisatie, waar het hoofdstuk zijn titel aan ontleent.
Wetenschap voor Hegel omvat naast het uiterst serieus nemen van
empirische wetenschap tevens het toestaan en de mobilisatie van dergelijke
denkbewegingen in onze zoektocht naar waarheid. In aanvulling op de
empirische hoofdstukken en de oplosbare inconsistenties die deze hoofdstukken
kenmerken, is de inclusie van een hoofdstuk toegewijd aan de onoplosbare
inconsistenties van ons biologisch systeem wat deze dissertatie maakt tot
wetenschap in de meest omvattende zin.
7
147
Authorship specifications
Chapter 2: Boonstra, E. A., van Schouwenburg, M. R., Seth, A. K., Bauer, M.,
Zantvoord, J. B., Kemper, E. M., Lansink, C. S., & Slagter, H. A. (2020). Conscious
perception and the modulatory role of dopamine: No effect of the dopamine D2
agonist cabergoline on visual masking, the attentional blink, and probabilistic
discrimination. Psychopharmacology, 237(9), 2855–2872. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00213-020-05579-9
E.A.B.: Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing—original draft, Writing—
review & editing, Visualization. M.R.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Writing—review & editing, A.K.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing—
review & editing, Funding acquisition. M.B: Methodology, Writing—review
& editing. J.B.Z.: Methodology, Psychiatric consultation, Writing—review &
editing, E.M.K.: Methodology, Pharmacy services, Writing—review & editing,
C.S.L.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing—review & editing, Funding
acquisition. H.A.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing—review & editing,
Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Chapter 3: Boonstra E. A., Bais, M. N., van Schouwenburg M. R., van
den Munckhof, P., Smit, D. J. A., Denys, D., & Slagter, H.A. (in prep.). Conscious
perception and the role of the basal ganglia: preliminary findings from a deep
brain stimulation study.
E.A.B.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing—original
draft, Writing—review & editing, Visualization. M.N.B.: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing—review & editing. M.R.S.: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing—review & editing. P.M: Surgery, Methodology,
Writing—review & editing. D.J.A.S.: Methodology, Writing—review & editing.
D.D: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing—review & editing, Supervision,
Funding acquisition. H.A.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing—review
& editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Chapter 4: Boonstra, E. A., & Slagter, H. A. (2019). The dialectics of free energy
minimization. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 13, 42. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnsys.2019.00042
148
Authorship specifications
E.A.B.: Conceptualization, Writing—original draft. Writing—review &
editing, Visualization. H.A.S.: Conceptualization, Writing—review & editing,
Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Chapter 5: Boonstra, E. A. & Slagter, H. A. (in prep.). Learning to predict based
on self- versus externally induced prediction violations: a direct comparison
using a Bayesian inference modelling approach.
E.A.B.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing—original
draft. Writing—review & editing, Visualization. H.A.S.: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing—review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.
149
Dankwoord / Acknowledgements
Mijn dank gaat allereerst uit naar mijn promotor en begeleider. Heleen, ik kan
er nog altijd niet helemaal bij hoe jij als onderzoeker ongebreidelde kunde en
grondigheid weet te combineren met niet alleen een ontstellende reikwijdte
aan onderzoeksrichtingen waarin je die kwaliteiten tentoonspreidt, maar ook
met onverminderde empathie voor zaken die niet direct betrekking hebben
op het academische bedrijf. Helemaal in een tijd waarin zowel in mijn directe
omgeving als in het nieuws constant sprake lijkt te zijn van machtsmisbruik
door hoogleraren die hun werknemers erbarmelijk behandelen, geeft het zoveel
hoop dat de universiteit blijkbaar nog altijd in staat is om ook mensen zoals jij te
koesteren. Ik ben zo dankbaar dat ik mijn dissertatie onder jouw begeleiding heb
mogen afronden. Mijn toekomst binnen de academische wereld is vooralsnog
onzeker, maar mocht die toekomst er zijn, dan weet ik zeker dat de enige manier
waarop ik een academisch onderzoeker wil zijn in lijn is met het goede voorbeeld
dat jij me hebt gegeven de afgelopen jaren.
Mijn dank gaat ook uit naar mijn copromotor Chris O. en tweede begeleider
Martine. Martine, bedankt voor onze intensieve samenwerking in het eerste
anderhalf jaar van mijn PhD. Jij hebt het schrik aanjagende begin van een
PhD zoveel makkelijker gemaakt met zowel je kundigheid als steun. Met
enige schaamte moet ik bekennen dat ik je aanmoediging bij je afscheid om
Amsterdam te verkennen nog altijd niet in de praktijk heb gebracht, maar
ik waardeer de aansporing. Chris O., we mogen dan niet bijzonder intensief
samengewerkt hebben, ik waardeer het enorm dat je bereid was en bent mijn
copromotor te zijn.
I am grateful to the colleagues I’ve had the pleasure of sharing an office
with at the VU (Elle, Inês, Caterina, Chris J., Eduard, and Katja). Thank you for
the warm and wholesome space you created, making me feel so very much at
home. More broadly, I am grateful to my colleagues outside of our office in the
department of Experimental and Applied Psychology, as well as in the Brain &
Cognition department at the UvA. I will miss the pantry lunches and department
activities. With special thanks to Suzan. You not only gave me such a warm
welcome and thoughtful tour of the VU when I arrived, but I appreciate you
preventing me from getting lost in university bureaucracy. Finally, I want to
extend my special thanks to Elle for being such a stable factor in our office, in
general but especially during the covid lockdowns, and to Changrun and Elle
for the daily lunches during the worst of the pandemic: you made lockdowns
so much better.
150
Dankwoord
I want to thank my fellow lab members in Heleen’s Plasticity & Cognition
lab (Ruben, Caterina, Chris J., Martine, Fleur, Lynn, Leon, Dirk, Josipa, Valentina,
and Jim). Thank you for the rounds of updates, discussions, and feedback during
our lab meetings, as well as for the sense of community you provided.
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to the members of my
defense committee: prof.dr. Jeroen Smeets, prof.dr. Birte Forstmann, prof.
dr. Floris de Lange, prof.dr. Clare Press, dr. Julian Kiverstein, and dr. Filip
van Opstal. Thank you for spending your time on critically evaluating this
dissertation, both in the lead-up to and during my defense.
I am deeply indebted to my partner Mieke. I am so glad we reconnected
when we did. You’re my favorite agent of chaos, expanding what I considered
possible in virtually all areas of my life. Thank you for sticking with me through
what was undoubtedly the most difficult year of my PhD. Whether we worked
from an Amstelveen hotbox, The Scholar Guide headquarters, or a Constantia
mansion, it was good because it was with you.
Ik ben dankbaar voor mijn zus Hanneloes. Loes, ik moet er niet aan denken
hoe de afgelopen jaren waren geweest zonder jou. Zelfs de meest moeilijke
zaken voelden dragelijk omdat we ze samendeden.
Ik betwijfel of deze dissertatie de eindstreep had gehaald zonder de niet
aflatende steun van vrienden en de mogelijkheid om tijd met jullie door te
brengen: Alex, Juliette, Wendy, Tycho, Kitty, Ronald, Chris H., Stefan, Masja,
Peter, Washant, Sharon en Sander.
Laila, our relationship may not have lasted the full duration of our PhDs,
but I feel incredibly grateful for all the walks, burgers, and wraps we shared
both during the weekends in Salzburg and Amsterdam, as well as during the
first covid lockdown.
Als laatste wil ik mijn ouders noemen. Frank, bedankt voor de manier
waarop je het belang van zowel wetenschappelijk onderzoek als kritiek op de
denkbeelden die we met ons meedragen weet te benadrukken. Annemieke,
bedankt voor het ogenschijnlijk eindeloze aantal zondagavonden waarop we
een maaltijd, een kop thee en al dan niet een potje rummikub hebben gedeeld.
31 oktober 2022
Evert Boonstra
151
References
Acevedo, N., Bosanac, P., Pikoos, T., Rossell, S., & Castle, D. (2021). Therapeutic
Neurostimulation in Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders: A
Systematic Review. Brain Sciences, 11(7), 948. https://doi.org/10.3390/
brainsci11070948
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands:
Active inference in the motor system. Brain Structure and Function, 218(3),
611–643. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5
Afrasiabi, M., Redinbaugh, M. J., Phillips, J. M., Kambi, N. A., Mohanta, S.,
Raz, A., Haun, A. M., & Saalmann, Y. B. (2021). Consciousness depends on
integration between parietal cortex, striatum, and thalamus. Cell Systems,
12(4), 363-373.e11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2021.02.003
Alexander, G. E., & Crutcher, M. D. (1990). Functional architecture of basal
ganglia circuits: Neural substrates of parallel processing. Trends in
Neurosciences, 13(7), 266–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-2236(90)90107-L
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a
computational framework for the embodied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–
2482. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1288-5
Allen, M., Poggiali, D., Whitaker, K., Marshall, T. R., & Kievit, R. A.
(2019). Raincloud plots: A multi-platform tool for robust data
visualization. Wellcome Open Research, 4, 63. https://doi.org/10.12688/
wellcomeopenres.15191.1
Allen, M., Varga, S., & Heck, D. H. (2022). Respiratory rhythms of the predictive
mind. Psychological Review. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000391
Almeida, L., Deeb, W., Spears, C., Opri, E., Molina, R., Martinez-Ramirez, D.,
Gunduz, A., Hess, C. W., & Okun, M. S. (2017). Current Practice and the
Future of Deep Brain Stimulation Therapy in Parkinson’s Disease. Seminars
in Neurology, 37(2), 205–214. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0037-1601893
Andrews, M. (2021). The math is not the territory: Navigating the free energy
principle. Biology & Philosophy, 36(3), 30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-
021-09807-0
Anggraini, D., Glasauer, S., & Wunderlich, K. (2018). Neural signatures of
reinforcement learning correlate with strategy adoption during spatial
navigation. Scientific Reports, 8(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
018-28241-z
Arsalidou, M., Duerden, E. G., & Taylor, M. J. (2013). The centre of the brain:
Topographical model of motor, cognitive, affective, and somatosensory
152
References
functions of the basal ganglia. Human Brain Mapping, 34(11), 3031–3054.
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22124
Ashby, A., William Ross (1903-1972). (1966). Design for a Brain: The Origin of
Adaptive Behaviour. Chapman & Hall.
Azzalini, D., Rebollo, I., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2019). Visceral Signals Shape
Brain Dynamics and Cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23(6), 488–
509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.03.007
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. (2019). The hierarchically
mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche. Physics
of Life Reviews, 31, 104-121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Baldermann, J. C., Schüller, T., Kohl, S., Voon, V., Li, N., Hollunder, B., Figee,
M., Haber, S. N., Sheth, S. A., Mosley, P. E., Huys, D., Johnson, K. A., Butson,
C., Ackermans, L., Bouwens van der Vlis, T., Leentjens, A. F. G., Barbe, M.,
Visser-Vandewalle, V., Kuhn, J., & Horn, A. (2021). Connectomic Deep Brain
Stimulation for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
90(10), 678–688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2021.07.010
Barto, A., Mirolli, M., & Baldassarre, G. (2013). Novelty or Surprise?
Frontiers in Psychology, 4. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00907
Bell, A. H., Summerfield, C., Morin, E. L., Malecek, N. J., & Ungerleider, L. G.
(2016). Encoding of Stimulus Probability in Macaque Inferior Temporal
Cortex. Current Biology, 26(17), 2280–2290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cub.2016.07.007
Bello-Morales, R., & Delgado-García, J. M. (2015). The social neuroscience
and the theory of integrative levels. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience,
9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2015.00054
Bennett, M. R., & Hacker, P. M. S. (2022). Philosophical Foundations of
Neuroscience. John Wiley & Sons.
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1950). An outline of general system theory. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, I(2), 134–165. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bjps/I.2.134
Bestmann, S., Harrison, L. M., Blankenburg, F., Mars, R. B., Haggard, P.,
Friston, K. J., & Rothwell, J. C. (2008). Influence of Uncertainty and Surprise
on Human Corticospinal Excitability during Preparation for Action.
Current Biology, 18(10), 775–780. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2008.04.051
Bisenius, S., Trapp, S., Neumann, J., & Schroeter, M. L. (2015). Identifying
neural correlates of visual consciousness with ALE meta-analyses.
NeuroImage, 122, 177–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.07.070
153
Bogacz, R. (2017). A tutorial on the free-energy framework for modelling
perception and learning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 76, 198–211.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2015.11.003
Bole, T. J. (1987). Contradiction in Hegel’s Science of Logic. The Review of
Metaphysics, 40, 515–534.
B Bolis, D., & Schilbach, L. (2020). ‘I interact therefore I am’: The self as a
historical product of dialectical attunement. Topoi, 39(3), 521-534. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11245-018-9574-0
Boonstra, E. A., van Schouwenburg, M. R., Seth, A. K., Bauer, M., Zantvoord,
J. B., Kemper, E. M., Lansink, C. S., & Slagter, H. A. (2020). Conscious
perception and the modulatory role of dopamine: No effect of the
dopamine D2 agonist cabergoline on visual masking, the attentional
blink, and probabilistic discrimination. Psychopharmacology, 237(9),
2855–2872. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-020-05579-9
Bordignon, M. (2017). Hegel: A Dialetheist? Truth and Contradiction in Hegel’s
Logic. Hegel Bulletin, 40(02), 198–214. https://doi.org/10.1017/hgl.2017.15
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10(4), 433–
436. https://doi.org/10.1163/156856897X00357
Brainard, M. S., & Doupe, A. J. (2000). Auditory feedback in learning and
maintenance of vocal behaviour. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 1(1), 31-40.
https://doi.org/10.1038/35036205
Breitmeyer, B. (2007). Visual masking: Past accomplishments, present status,
future developments. Advances in Cognitive Psychology, 3(1–2), 9–20.
https://doi.org/10.2478/v10053-008-0010-7
Brocker, D. T., & Grill, W. M. (2013). Principles of electrical stimulation of
neural tissue. In Handbook of Clinical Neurology (Vol. 116, pp. 3–18). Elsevier.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53497-2.00001-2
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., & Friston, K. (2013). Active
inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cognitive Processing, 14(4),
411–427. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3
Brown, L. L., Schneider, J. S., & Lidsky, T. I. (1997). Sensory and cognitive
functions of the basal ganglia. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 7(2), 157–
163. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(97)80003-7
Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy
minimization, and optimal grip on a field of affordances. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience, 8(August), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2014.00599
154
References
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., & Kiverstein, J. (2016). The anticipating brain is
not a scientist: The free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive
perspective. Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Buonomano, D. V., & Merzenich, M. M. (1998). CORTICAL PLASTICITY: From
Synapses to Maps. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 21(1), 149–186. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.21.1.149
Buzsáki, G. (2019). The Brain from Inside Out. Oxford University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190905385.001.0001
Cardoso-Leite, P., Mamassian, P., Schütz-Bosbach, S., & Waszak, F. (2010).
A New Look at Sensory Attenuation: Action-Effect Anticipation Affects
Sensitivity, Not Response Bias. Psychological Science, 21(12), 1740–1745.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610389187
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the
future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(03), 181–204.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477
Clark, A. (2017). Busting out: Predictive brains, embodied minds, and the
puzzle of the evidentiary veil. Noûs, 51(4), 727-753. https://doi.org/10.1111/
nous.12140
Clark, A. (2016b). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind.
Oxford University Press.
Coenen, V. A., Panksepp, J., Hurwitz, T. A., Urbach, H., & Mädler, B. (2012).
Human Medial Forebrain Bundle (MFB) and Anterior Thalamic Radiation
(ATR): Imaging of Two Major Subcortical Pathways and the Dynamic
Balance of Opposite Affects in Understanding Depression. The Journal
of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 24(2), 223–236. https://doi.
org/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.11080180
Coenen, V. A., Schlaepfer, T. E., Goll, P., Reinacher, P. C., Voderholzer, U., Elst,
L. T. van, Urbach, H., & Freyer, T. (2017). The medial forebrain bundle as
a target for deep brain stimulation for obsessive-compulsive disorder.
CNS Spectrums, 22(3), 282–289. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852916000286
Corlett, P. R., Horga, G., Fletcher, P. C., Alderson-Day, B., Schmack, K., &
Powers, A. R. (2019). Hallucinations and Strong Priors. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 23(2), 114–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.001
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness. Nature
Neuroscience, 6(2), 119–126. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn0203-119
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sengupta, B., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Neural Dynamics
under Active Inference: Plausibility and Efficiency of Information
Processing. Entropy, 23(4), Article 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23040454
155
Dandekar, M. P., Fenoy, A. J., Carvalho, A. F., Soares, J. C., & Quevedo, J.
(2018). Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: an
integrative review of preclinical and clinical findings and translational
implications. Molecular psychiatry, 23(5), 1094-1112. https://doi.org/10.1038/
mp.2018.2
Daunizeau, J., Ouden, H. E. M. den, Pessiglione, M., Kiebel, S. J., Friston, K. J., &
Stephan, K. E. (2010). Observing the Observer (II): Deciding When to Decide.
PLOS ONE, 5(12), e15555. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0015555
Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J.-P. (2011). Experimental and Theoretical
Approaches to Conscious Processing. Neuron, 70(2), 200–227. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.03.018
Del Cul, A., Baillet, S., & Dehaene, S. (2007). Brain dynamics underlying the
nonlinear threshold for access to consciousness. PLoS Biology, 5(10), 2408–
2423. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0050260
Dombert, P. L., Kuhns, A., Mengotti, P., Fink, G. R., & Vossel, S. (2016).
Functional mechanisms of probabilistic inference in feature- and
space-based attentional systems. NeuroImage, 142, 553–564. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.08.010
Edelman, G. M. (2003). Naturalizing consciousness: A theoretical framework.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(9), 5520–5524. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0931349100
Elsner, B., & Hommel, B. (2001). Effect anticipation and action control. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 27(1), 229.
Feldman, D. E. (2009). Synaptic Mechanisms for Plasticity in Neocortex.
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 32(1), 33–55. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.neuro.051508.135516
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-
energy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4, 215. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2010.00215
Figee, M., Luigjes, J., Smolders, R., Valencia-Alfonso, C. E., Van Wingen, G.,
De Kwaasteniet, B., ... & Denys, D. (2013). Deep brain stimulation restores
frontostriatal network activity in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Nature
neuroscience, 16(4), 386-387. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3344
Fisher, M. (2009). Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? John Hunt
Publishing.
FitzGerald, T. H. B., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. (2015). Dopamine, reward
learning, and active inference. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 9.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2015.00136
156
References
Frässle, S., Aponte, E. A., Bollmann, S., Brodersen, K. H., Do, C. T., Harrison,
O. K., Harrison, S. J., Heinzle, J., Iglesias, S., Kasper, L., Lomakina, E. I.,
Mathys, C., Müller-Schrader, M., Pereira, I., Petzschner, F. H., Raman,
S., Schöbi, D., Toussaint, B., Weber, L. A., … Stephan, K. E. (2021). TAPAS:
An Open-Source Software Package for Translational Neuromodeling
and Computational Psychiatry. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 12. https://www.
frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.680811
Fridgeirsson, E. A., Bais, M. N., Eijsker, N., Thomas, R. M., Smit, D. J. A.,
Bergfeld, I. O., ... & Denys, D. (2021). The ventral striatum harbours
patient specific intracranial neural signatures of obsessions and
compulsions. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.04.21254830
Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 360(1456), 815–836. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1622
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(7), 293–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy,
14(11), 2100–2121. https://doi.org/10.3390/e14112100
Friston, K. (2018a). Am I self-conscious? Frontiers in Psychology, 9(April),
579–579. https://doi.org/10.3389/FPSYG.2018.00579
Friston, K. (2018b). Does predictive coding have a future? Nature Neuroscience,
21(8), 1019–1021. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0200-7
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics.
ArXiv:1906.10184 [q-Bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
Friston, K., & Buzsáki, G. (2016). The Functional Anatomy of Time: What and
When in the Brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(7), 500–511. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.001
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86),
20130475. https://doi.org/10.1038/449001a
Friston, K. J. (2013). Active inference and free energy. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 36(3), 212–213. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12002142
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., Hafner, D., Hesp, C., & Parr, T. (2021). Sophisticated
Inference. Neural Computation, 33(3), 713–763. https://doi.org/10.1162/
neco_a_01351
Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M., Adams, R., Brown, H.,
Dolan, R. J., Moran, R., Stephan, K. E., & Bestmann, S. (2012). Dopamine,
157
affordance and active inference. PLoS Computational Biology, 8(1). https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002327
Friston, K. J., Stephan, K. E., Montague, R., & Dolan, R. J. (2014). Computational
psychiatry: The brain as a phantastic organ. The Lancet Psychiatry, 1(2),
148–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70275-5
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the Origins of
Consciousness: From Cartesian Duality to Markovian Monism. Entropy,
22(5), 516. https://doi.org/10.3390/e22050516
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T.,
& Dolan, R. J. (2014). The anatomy of choice: Dopamine and decision-
making. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
369(1655), 20130481–20130481. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0481
Friston, K., Thornton, C., & Clark, A. (2012). Free-energy minimization and the
dark-room problem. Frontiers in psychology, 130. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2012.00130
Gershman, S. J. (2019). What does the free energy principle tell us about the
brain? Neurons, Behavior, Data analysis, and Theory, 2(3), 1-10.
Graat, I., Liebrand, L., van de Munckhof, P., Schuurman, R., Bergfeld, I.,
Mocking, R., & Denys, D. (2021). Effect of brain target and stimulation
paradigm on response to deep brain stimulation in obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Brain Stimulation, 14(6), 1727–1728. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
brs.2021.10.461
Haber, S. N., & McFarland, N. R. (1999). The Concept of the Ventral Striatum
in Nonhuman Primates. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 877(1),
33–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1999.tb09259.x
Hegel, G. W. F. (2007). Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel: Lectures on the Philosophy
of Spirit 1827-8. Oxford University Press.
Hegel, G. W. F., & Miller, A. V. (2004). Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature: Being Part
Two of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830), Translated from
Nicolin and Pöggeler’s Edition (1959), and from the Zusätze in Michelet’s Text
(1847). Clarendon Press.
Helmholtz, H. von. (1995). Science and Culture: Popular and Philosophical Essays
(D. Cahan, Ed.). University of Chicago Press. https://press.uchicago.edu/
ucp/books/book/chicago/S/bo3616257.html
Hobson, J. A., & Friston, K. J. (2014). Consciousness, dreams, and inference:
The Cartesian theatre revisited. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 21(1-2),
6-32.
Hobson, J. A., & Friston, K. J. (2016). A response to our theatre critics. Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 23(3-4), 245-254.
158
References
Hobson, J. A., Hong, C. C.-H., & Friston, K. J. (2014). Virtual reality and
consciousness inference in dreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 5. https://
www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01133
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199682737.001.0001
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Nous, 50(2), 259–285. https://doi.
org/10.1111/nous.12062
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for
identifying the neural correlates of consciousness. Philosophy and the Mind
Sciences, 1(II). https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
Hommel, B. (1996). The cognitive representation of action: Automatic
integration of perceived action effects. Psychological Research, 59(3), 176–
186. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00425832
Hommel, B. (2019). Theory of Event Coding (TEC) V2. 0: Representing
and controlling perception and action. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 81(7), 2139-2154. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-019-01779-4
Hommel, B., & Elsner, B. (2009). Acquisition, representation, and control
of action. In E. Morsella, J. A. Bargh, & P. M. Gollwitzer (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Human Action (pp. 368–397). Oxford University Press.
Kant, I. (2000). Critique of the Power of Judgment. Cambridge University Press.
Kennedy, B. L., Rawding, J., Most, S. B., & Hoffman, J. E. (2014). Emotion-
induced blindness reflects competition at early and late processing stages:
An ERP study. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 14(4), 1485–
1498. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-014-0303-x
Kiverstein, J., Rietveld, E., Slagter, H. A., & Denys, D. (2019). Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder: A Pathology of Self-Confidence? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 23(5), 369–372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.02.005
Knill, D. C., & Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: The role of uncertainty
in neural coding and computation. Trends in Neurosciences, 27(12), 712–719.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2004.10.007
Kok, P., Jehee, J. F. M., & de Lange, F. P. (2012). Less Is More: Expectation
Sharpens Representations in the Primary Visual Cortex. Neuron, 75(2),
265–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.04.034
Korka, B., Schröger, E., & Widmann, A. (2019). Action Intention-based and
Stimulus Regularity-based Predictions: Same or Different? Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 31(12), 1917–1932. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn_a_01456
Korka, B., Widmann, A., Waszak, F., Darriba, Á., & Schröger, E. (2022). The
auditory brain in action: Intention determines predictive processing
159
in the auditory system—A review of current paradigms and findings.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 29(2), 321–342. https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13423-021-01992-z
Kuhns, A. B., Dombert, P. L., Mengotti, P., Fink, G. R., & Vossel, S. (2017). Spatial
Attention, Motor Intention, and Bayesian Cue Predictability in the Human
Brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 37(21), 5334–5344. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3255-16.2017
Leuthold, H. (2011). The Simon effect in cognitive electrophysiology: A
short review. Acta Psychologica, 136(2), 203–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
actpsy.2010.08.001
Lewontin, R., & Levins, R. (2007). Biology Under the Influence: Dialectical Essays
on the Coevolution of Nature and Society. NYU Press.
Liebrand, L. C., Caan, M. W. A., Schuurman, P. R., Munckhof, P. van den,
Figee, M., Denys, D., & Wingen, G. A. van. (2019). Individual white matter
bundle trajectories are associated with deep brain stimulation response
in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Brain Stimulation: Basic, Translational,
and Clinical Research in Neuromodulation, 12(2), 353–360. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.brs.2018.11.014
Locke, J. (1796). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. T. Longman.
López-Astorga, M. (2016). The principle of explosion: Aristotle versus
the current syntactic theories. ΣΧΟΛ . Философское антиковедение и
классическая традиция, 10(1), 40-49.
Η
Love, J., Selker, R., Marsman, M., Jamil, T., Dropmann, D., Verhagen, J., Ly,
A., Gronau, Q. F., Smíra, M., Epskamp, S., Matzke, D., Wild, A., Knight, P.,
Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2019). JASP: Graphical
Statistical Software for Common Statistical Designs. Journal of Statistical
Software, 88(2). https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v088.i02
Malabou, C. (2005). The Future of Hegel: Plasticity, Temporality, and Dialectic.
Psychology Press.
Malabou, C. (2008). What Should We Do with Our Brain? Fordham University
Press.
Marques, V. (2016). Positing the Presuppositions—Dialectical Biology and the
Minimal Structure of Life. In A. Hamza & F. Ruda (Eds.), Slavoj Žižek and
Dialectical Materialism (pp. 113–132). Palgrave Macmillan US. https://doi.
org/10.1057/9781137538611_9
Marques, V., & Brito, C. (2014). THE RISE AND FALL OF THE MACHINE
METAPHOR: ORGANIZATIONAL SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN MACHINES AND LIVING BEINGS. Verifiche XLIII, 1(3), 77–111.
160
References
Marx, K., & Engels, F. (2002). The Communist Manifesto. Penguin Publishing
Group.
Mathys, C., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2011). A Bayesian
Foundation for Individual Learning Under Uncertainty. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2011.00039
Mathys, C., Lomakina, E. I., Daunizeau, J., Iglesias, S., Brodersen, K. H.,
Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2014). Uncertainty in perception and the
Hierarchical Gaussian Filter. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00825
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (2012). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization
of the Living. Springer Science & Business Media.
McIntyre, C. C., Grill, W. M., Sherman, D. L., & Thakor, N. V. (2004). Cellular
Effects of Deep Brain Stimulation: Model-Based Analysis of Activation
and Inhibition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91(4), 1457–1469. https://doi.
org/10.1152/jn.00989.2003
Michelini, F. (2012). Hegel’s notion of natural purpose. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 43(1), 133–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
shpsc.2011.05.012
Michelini, F., Wunsch, M., & Stederoth, D. (2018). Philosophy of nature and
organism’s autonomy: On Hegel, Plessner and Jonas’ theories of living
beings. History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences, 40(3), 56. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40656-018-0212-3
Miller, G. A. (2003). The cognitive revolution: A historical perspective.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(3), 141–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-
6613(03)00029-9
Most, S. B., Chun, M. M., Widders, D. M., & Zald, D. H. (2005). Attentional
rubbernecking: Cognitive control and personality in emotion-induced
blindness. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(4), 654–661. https://doi.
org/10.3758/BF03196754
Nittono, H. (2004, August). The action-perception paradigm: A new
perspective in cognitive neuroscience. In International Congress Series (Vol.
1270, pp. 26-31). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ics.2004.04.093
Nittono, H., Hamada, A., & Hori, T. (2003). Brain Potentials after Clicking
a Mouse: A New Psychophysiological Approach to Human-Computer
Interaction. Human Factors, 45(4), 591–600. https://doi.org/10.1518/
hfes.45.4.591.27087
161
Nyström, M., & Holmqvist, K. (2010). An adaptive algorithm for fixation,
saccade, and glissade detection in eyetracking data. Behavior Research
Methods, 42(1), 188–204. https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.42.1.188
Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., & Schoffelen, J.-M. (2011). FieldTrip:
Open Source Software for Advanced Analysis of MEG, EEG, and Invasive
Electrophysiological Data. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience,
2011, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/156869
Ostry, D. J., & Gribble, P. L. (2016). Sensory Plasticity in Human Motor
Learning. Trends in Neurosciences, 39(2), 114–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tins.2015.12.006
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Generalised free energy and active
inference. Biological cybernetics, 113(5), 495-513. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00422-019-00805-w
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Active Inference: The Free Energy
Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. MIT Press.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. J. (2015). Active Inference, homeostatic
regulation and adaptive behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134,
17–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Pouget, A., Beck, J. M., Ma, W. J., & Latham, P. E. (2013). Probabilistic brains:
Knowns and unknowns. Nature Neuroscience, 16(9), 1170–1178. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nn.3495
Press, C., Kok, P., & Yon, D. (2020). The Perceptual Prediction Paradox. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 24(1), 13–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.11.003
Prinz, W. (1997). Perception and Action Planning. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 9(2), 129–154. https://doi.org/10.1080/713752551
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews,
24, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Raymond, J. E., Shapiro, K. L., & Arnell, K. M. (1992). Temporary suppression
of visual processing in an RSVP task: An attentional blink? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18(3), 849–
860. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.18.3.849
Redgrave, P., Prescott, T. J., & Gurney, K. (1999). The basal ganglia: A vertebrate
solution to the selection problem? Neuroscience, 89(4), 1009–1023. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4522(98)00319-4
Redgrave, P., Vautrelle, N., & Reynolds, J. N. J. (2011). Functional properties
of the basal ganglia’s re-entrant loop architecture: selection and
reinforcement. Neuroscience, 198, 138-151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2011.07.060
162
References
Reznik, D., Henkin, Y., Schadel, N., & Mukamel, R. (2014). Lateralized
enhancement of auditory cortex activity and increased sensitivity to
self-generated sounds. Nature Communications, 5(1), 4059. https://doi.
org/10.1038/ncomms5059
Reznik, D., & Mukamel, R. (2019). Motor output, neural states and auditory
perception. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 96, 116–126. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.10.021
Sajid, N., Ball, P. J., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Active Inference: Demystified
and Compared. Neural Computation, 33(3), 674–712. https://doi.org/10.1162/
neco_a_01357
Schafer, E. W., & Marcus, M. M. (1973). Self-stimulation alters human sensory
brain responses. Science, 181(4095), 175-177.
Schrodinger, E. (2012). What is Life? With Mind and Matter and Autobiographical
Sketches. Cambridge University Press.
Schwarz, K. A., Pfister, R., Kluge, M., Weller, L., & Kunde, W. (2018). Do we see
it or not? Sensory attenuation in the visual domain. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 147(3), 418–430. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000353
Seger, C. A. (2013). The visual corticostriatal loop through the tail of the
caudate: Circuitry and function. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience,
7(December), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2013.00104
Sergent, C., Baillet, S., & Dehaene, S. (2005). Timing of the brain events
underlying access to consciousness during the attentional blink. Nature
Neuroscience, 8(10), Article 10. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1549
Seth, A. K. (2014). A predictive processing theory of sensorimotor
contingencies: Explaining the puzzle of perceptual presence and its
absence in synesthesia. Cognitive Neuroscience, 5(2), 97–118. https://doi.
org/10.1080/17588928.2013.877880
Seth, A. K. (2015). The Cybernetic Bayesian BrainThe Cybernetic Bayesian
Brain: From Interoceptive Inference to Sensorimotor Contingencies:
From Interoceptive Inference to Sensorimotor Contingencies. Open MIND.
https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958570108
Seth, A. K., & Bayne, T. (2022). Theories of consciousness. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00587-4
Seth, A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 371(1708), 20160007. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Shapiro, K. L., Raymond, J. E., & Arnell, K. M. (1997). The attentional blink.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1(8), 291–296. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-
6613(97)01094-2
163
Simon, J. R., & Rudell, A. P. (1967). Auditory S-R compatibility: The effect of
an irrelevant cue on information processing. Journal of Applied Psychology,
51(3), 300–304. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0020586
Slagter, H. A., Davidson, R. J., & Tomer, R. (2010). Eye-blink rate predicts
individual differences in pseudoneglect. Neuropsychologia, 48(5), 1265–
1268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.12.027
Slagter, H. A., Mazaheri, A., Reteig, L. C., Smolders, R., Figee, M., Mantione, M.,
Schuurman, P. R., & Denys, D. (2017). Contributions of the Ventral Striatum
to Conscious Perception: An Intracranial EEG Study of the Attentional
Blink. The Journal of Neuroscience, 37(5), 1081–1089. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2282-16.2016
Slagter, H. A., Tomer, R., Christian, B. T., Fox, A. S., Colzato, L. S., King, C. R.,
Murali, D., & Davidson, R. J. (2012). PET Evidence for a Role for Striatal
Dopamine in the Attentional Blink: Functional Implications. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24(9), 1932–1940. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn_a_00255
Smith, Y., Raju, D. V., Pare, J.-F., & Sidibe, M. (2004). The thalamostriatal
system: A highly specific network of the basal ganglia circuitry. Trends
in Neurosciences, 27(9), 520–527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2004.07.004
Smolders, R., Mazaheri, A., van Wingen, G., Figee, M., de Koning, P. P., & Denys,
D. (2013). Deep Brain Stimulation Targeted at the Nucleus Accumbens
Decreases the Potential for Pathologic Network Communication. Biological
Psychiatry, 74(10), e27–e28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.03.012
Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Daunizeau, J., Moran, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2009).
Bayesian model selection for group studies. NeuroImage, 46(4), 1004–1017.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.03.025
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT Press.
Swanson, L. R. (2016). The predictive processing paradigm has roots in
Kant. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 10, 79. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnsys.2017.00098
Sweatt, J. D. (2016). Neural plasticity and behavior – sixty years of conceptual
advances. Journal of Neurochemistry, 139, 179–199. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jnc.13580
Synofzik, M., Vosgerau, G., & Voss, M. (2013). The experience of agency: An
interplay between prediction and postdiction. Frontiers in Psychology, 4.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00127
Thaler, L., Schütz, A. C., Goodale, M. A., & Gegenfurtner, K. R. (2013). What is
the best fixation target? The effect of target shape on stability of fixational
164
References
eye movements. Vision Research, 76, 31–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
visres.2012.10.012
Thompson, E., & Varela, F. J. (2001). Radical embodiment: Neural dynamics
and consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(10), 418–425. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01750-2
van den Heuvel, O. A., van Wingen, G., Soriano-Mas, C., Alonso, P.,
Chamberlain, S. R., Nakamae, T., Denys, D., Goudriaan, A. E., & Veltman, D. J.
(2016). Brain circuitry of compulsivity. European Neuropsychopharmacology,
26(5), 810–827. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.12.005
van Opstal, F., Van Laeken, N., Verguts, T., Van Dijck, J. P., De Vos, F., Goethals,
I., & Fias, W. (2014). Supp: Correlation between individual differences in
striatal dopamine and in visual consciousness. Current Biology, 24(7).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.02.001
van Wingen, G., Bergfeld, I., de Koning, P., Graat, I., Luigjes, J., Mocking,
R., ... & Denys, D. (2022). Comment to: Deep brain stimulation for
refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD): emerging or established
therapy? Molecular Psychiatry, 27(3), 1276-1277. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41380-021-01411-8
Varela, F. J. (1997). Patterns of life: Intertwining identity and cognition. Brain
and Cognition, 34(1), 72-87.
Vasser, M., Vuillaume, L., Cleeremans, A., & Aru, J. (2019). Waving goodbye to
contrast: Self-generated hand movements attenuate visual sensitivity.
Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niy013
Vossel, S., Bauer, M., Mathys, C., Adams, R. A., Dolan, R. J., Stephan, K. E., &
Friston, K. J. (2014). Cholinergic Stimulation Enhances Bayesian Belief
Updating in the Deployment of Spatial Attention. Journal of Neuroscience,
34(47), 15735–15742. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0091-14.2014
Vossel, S., Mathys, C., Daunizeau, J., Bauer, M., Driver, J., Friston, K. J., &
Stephan, K. E. (2014). Spatial Attention, Precision, and Bayesian Inference:
A Study of Saccadic Response Speed. Cerebral Cortex, 24(6), 1436–1450.
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs418
Vossel, S., Mathys, C., Stephan, K. E., & Friston, K. J. (2015). Cortical Coupling
Reflects Bayesian Belief Updating in the Deployment of Spatial Attention.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 35(33), 11532–11542. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1382-15.2015
Weber, A., & Varela, F. J. V. (2002). Life after Kant: Natural purposes and the
autopoietic foundations of biological individuality. Phenomenology and
the Cognitive Sciences, 1, 97–125. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1020368120174
165
Weiss, C., Herwig, A., & Schütz-Bosbach, S. (2011). The self in action effects:
Selective attenuation of self-generated sounds. Cognition, 121(2), 207–218.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2011.06.011
Weiss, C., & Schütz-Bosbach, S. (2012). Vicarious action preparation does not
result in sensory attenuation of auditory action effects. Consciousness and
Cognition, 21(4), 1654–1661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2012.08.010
Wen, W. (2019). Does delay in feedback diminish sense of agency? A
review. Consciousness and Cognition, 73, 102759. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
concog.2019.05.007
Whiting, A. C., Oh, M. Y., & Whiting, D. M. (2018). Deep brain stimulation for
appetite disorders: A review. Neurosurgical Focus, 45(2), E9. https://doi.
org/10.3171/2018.4.FOCUS18141
Widmann, A., Schröger, E., & Maess, B. (2015). Digital filter design for
electrophysiological data – a practical approach. Journal of Neuroscience
Methods, 250, 34–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.08.002
Wiese, W., & Metzinger, T. (2017). Vanilla predictive processing for
philosophers: A primer on predictive processing. Philosophy and Predictive
Processing, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573024
Wittenberg, G. F. (2010). Experience, cortical remapping, and recovery in brain
disease. Neurobiology of Disease, 37(2), 252–258. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nbd.2009.09.007
Wu, H., Hariz, M., Visser-Vandewalle, V., Zrinzo, L., Coenen, V. A., Sheth, S.
A., ... & Nuttin, B. (2021). Deep brain stimulation for refractory obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD): emerging or established therapy?. Molecular
psychiatry, 26(1), 60-65. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-020-00933-x
Žižek, S. (1989). The Sublime Object of Ideology. Verso Books.
Žižek, S. (1993). Tarrying with the Negative: Kant, Hegel, and the Critique of
Ideology. Duke University Press.
Žižek, S. (2009). The Parallax View. MIT Press.
Žižek, S. (2012). Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of Dialectical
Materialism. Verso Books.
Žižek, S. (2016). Disparities. Bloomsbury Publishing.
166