Quantum formalism for cognitive psychology
Dorje C. Brody
School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Surrey,
Guildford GU2 7XH, United Kingdom
(Dated: March 13, 2023)
The cognitive state of mind concerning a range of choices to be made can eﬀectively
be modelled in terms of an element of a high-dimensional Hilbert space. The
dynamics of the state of mind resulting form information acquisition is characterised
by the von Neumann-L¨ uders projection postulate of quantum theory. This is shown
to give rise to an uncertainty-minimising dynamical behaviour equivalent to the
Bayesian updating, hence providing an alternative approach to characterising the
dynamics of cognitive state that is consistent with the free energy principle in brain
science. The quantum formalism however goes beyond the range of applicability
of classical reasoning in explaining cognitive behaviours, thus opens up new and
intriguing possibilities.
Introduction
The present paper is concerned with the use of Hilbert space techniques, so successfully
implemented in characterising behaviours and properties of quantum systems [1], to model
cognitive ‘psychology’ in the sense to be deﬁned below. The paper, on the other, is not
concerned with whether quantum eﬀects, such as interference, violation of the Bell inequality,
or the use of complex numbers, might play a role in psychology or in brain activities. There
are diﬀering opinions on the matter [2–6], but these will not be addressed here, for, the
use of Hilbert space techniques in modelling cognitive behaviour, in themselves, do not
necessarily require functioning of brain neurophysiology to be quantum mechanical. What
does concern us will include the tensor product structure of the Hilbert space, entanglements,
the superposition principle, the projection postulate, and decoherence. While some may
view these to be intrinsically quantum-mechanical eﬀects, I will show that they are in fact
intrinsic to any probabilistic system modelled on a Hilbert space — an idea that dates back
to the pioneering work of Rao [7]. At any rate, my purpose here is to illustrate how it
is both natural and eﬀective to implement Hilbert space techniques in modelling cognitive
human behaviours. Such a proposal, in itself, is not new (see, e.g., [8, 9] and references cited
therein). My main contribution is to introduce a formalism that allows for a systematic
treatment of the dynamics of cognitive state of mind, from which predictions can be made.
The key idea to be explored is that the state of mind of a person, to be deﬁned more
precisely, can eﬃciently be represented in terms of a vector in a high-dimensional Hilbert
space, which in turn is a tensor product of lower-dimensional Hilbert spaces. However, before
turning to technical discussion, I would like to illustrate the signiﬁcance of the superposition
principle in this context through simple examples. The ﬁrst concerns the tossing of a fair
coin. When a coin is tossed, but the outcome not yet revealed, no one will dispute the state
of the coin, which is a macroscopic classical object: it is either in the ‘head’ state or in the
‘tale’ state. In fact, even before the coin is tossed, it will be known to all that the state of
the coin will be either head or tail. However, a person who is in the position to guess the
arXiv:2303.06055v1  [q-bio.NC]  9 Mar 2023
2
outcome is having a diﬀerent state of mind. Until the moment when a choice is made, the
person’s mind is in the state of neither head nor tail – it is in a state of a superposition.
Thus there is a dissonance between the objective reality of the state of the coin and the
state of the mind attempting to determine the state of the coin.
Another example is seen in children’s hand game of rock, scissors and paper. Again, until
the last moment when the decision is made as to which hand to choose, the person’s mind is
in the state of a superposition between the three alternatives. Of course, with any decision,
a person may come with a predetermined outcome — as in Groucho Marx’s whatever it is,
I’m against it! But until when that decision is made, the fact remains that the mind is in an
indeﬁnite state. Only at the moment when the decision is made, for example to declare that
the outcome of the coin tossing is head, or choosing the scissors hand, the state ‘collapses’
into one of the deﬁnite states. This situation is very much analogous to the measurement
process in quantum theory.
With these heuristics in mind, the present paper will be organised as follows. I begin
by deﬁning what I mean by the state of mind, which essentially will be a Hilbert-space
representation of the probability assignments to the totality of choices available to the person.
A given set of choices will then be modelled as an observable acting on this Hilbert space. The
idea I put forward is closely related to the proposal made by Busemeyer and his collaborators
[10], and that by Khrennikov and his collaborators [11]. One diﬀerence to the latter, however,
is that I model cognitive behaviours directly using the quantum formalism, rather than
starting from the quantum theory and then deduce implications in behavioural modelling
by reduction. As a consequence, I am able to gain certain insights into human behaviour that
go beyond what is commonly understood in cognitive psychology. I examine how the state of
mind changes when a person acquires noisy information that is relevant to decision making.
My approach will be consistent with the cybernetics framework of Wiener as an attempt
to understand the dynamics of living systems [12]. I will use the von Neumann-L¨ uders
projection postulate in quantum mechanics to arrive at the change in the state of mind,
and show that the result agrees with the classical formulation using the Bayes formula; in
agreement with related previous ﬁndings [11]. Further, I show that the projection postulate
gives rise to an evolution that on average minimises future ‘surprises’, and hence is consistent
with the free-energy principle widely adopted in brain science [13]. I then consider what
happens when noisy information arrives in continuous time. When the dynamical evolution
of the state of mind resulting from a sequential von Neumann-L¨ uders projection postulate is
reduced to a projective Hilbert space, the dynamical equation reveals an important feature,
namely, that each state of zero uncertainty, having vanishing Shannon-Wiener entropy, acts
as an attractor to the dynamics. The result provides a geometric explanation of certain
characteristics of human behaviour seen in psychology literature (such as conﬁrmation bias),
which I have previously called the tenacious Bayesian behaviour [14]. The work presented
here demonstrates the fact that if a person’s opinion is strongly skewed towards one of
the false alternatives, and if all choice observables are commutative, then even if partial
information about the truth is revealed and the person behaves rationally in accordance with
Bayesian updating, it is very diﬃcult for the person to escape from the initial misconception.
In other words, adherences to false narratives commonly observed in today’s society is not
due to irrational behaviours. Following the proposal in [8], I then consider what happens if
choice observables are not commutative. This is motivated by the observation that many
empirical observations concerning cognitive human behaviours cannot be fully described by
use of a commuting set of observables. The existence of incompatible observables can be
3
used to rescue a person fallen into a false attractor; a possibility that is unavailable by use
of purely classical reasonings.
Decision making and the state of mind
Throughout the paper I will be concerned with the cognitive process of decision making,
which will be a topic distinct from what is known as statistical decision theory, for which
there are excellent treatise [15, 16]. A decision making occurs when a person is unsure from
which alternative to choose; but I will be using the term ‘decision making’ in a broad sense
to include a person’s uncertain point of view on a topic, for which there are multiple views,
and for which there may not be a need to choose one particular alternative. At any rate,
this uncertainty, which is largely due to lack of suﬃcient information, can be modelled in the
form of a set of probabilities that represents the likelihoods of diﬀerent alternatives being
selected. Suppose that a decision needs to be made to choose one out of N alternatives.
(The number of alternatives can be inﬁnite, or even uncountable — the formalism extends
naturally to these cases, but for simplicity I will consider the ﬁnite case here.) At a given
moment in time, let pk denote the likelihood that the kth alternative is selected. If pk = 1
for a value of k then the mind is in a deﬁnite state in relation to this decision. Hence for a
given decision, the set of numbers (p1,p2,...,p N) represents the state of mind in relation to
that decision making.
Of course, at any moment in time one faces a multitude of decisions, not just one, some of
which are intertwined with each other while others are independent. In probability theory,
such a situation is modelled by means of a joint probability for the totality of decisions.
Alternatively, though equivalent, the situation can be modelled on a Hilbert space by use
of the square-root map: pk →ψk = √pk. Clearly, the vector with components {ψk}, in the
basis |ek⟩= (0,0,0,..., 1,0,..., 0) with only the kth element nonzero, is an element of an
N-dimensional real Hilbert space HN. Thus, in terms of the Dirac notation the state can
be expressed in the form of a superposition |ψ⟩= ∑
kψk|ek⟩. If there is a second decision
to be made out of M alternatives, then the state of a person’s mind in relation to these two
choices is represented by an element of the tensor product HN ⊗HM. This tensor product
structure arises solely from statistical dependencies of two decisions, when modelled on a
Hilbert space.
This construction extends for an arbitrary number of decisions to be made. With this in
mind, I deﬁne the state of mind of a person facing a range of alternatives to consider, at any
moment in time, to be an element of the tensor productH= ⊗K
l=1Hl, where K is the number
of distinct decisions. If two decisions can be made independently, then the component of
the state vector belonging to the corresponding subspace of Hwill be in a product state.
Otherwise, a state is entangled. As a simple example, consider a pair of binary decisions, for
example, whether to take ﬁsh or meat for the main course, and whether to take red or white
wine to accompany the dinner. Writing |F⟩and |M⟩for the food choices, and similarly |R⟩
and |W⟩for the wine selections, if the state of mind of a person is |ψ⟩= c1|FW⟩+ c2|MR⟩,
then the person will choose ﬁsh with white wine with probability c2
1, and meat with red
wine with probability c2
2 = 1 −c2
1; but no other option will be chosen. This is evidently an
entangled state, which collapses to one or the other alternatives at the moment (or before)
the waiter arrives and takes the order.
In this Hilbert space formulation, a given choice can be modelled by a real symmetric
matrix, whose dimension is the number of alternatives. Such a matrix corresponds to observ-
4
ables in quantum mechanics. I will assume, for now, that all such ‘observables’ or ‘choices’
are compatible in the sense that the matrix representations can be diagonalised simultane-
ously. What this means is that at any given time, an arbitrary number of decisions can be
made simultaneously. It is then evident that no state of mind, whether entangled or not,
can violate laws of classical probability, and hence no state can violate, in particular, Bell’s
inequalities. Later in the paper, however, I will consider the case where choice observables
are incompatible.
The eigenvalues of choice observables then label diﬀerent alternatives. This is analogous
to quantum observables when it concerns labelling outcomes of a single measurement. How-
ever, observables in quantum theory have a second role apart from representing measurement
outcomes: they generate dynamics. As a consequence, the diﬀerences of observable eigen-
values have direct physical consequences, and hence they cannot be chosen arbitrarily. It
appears, in contrast, that the diﬀerences of eigenvalues of the choice observables have no
signiﬁcance: the results of a selection, such as choosing a hand in the game of rock, scissors
and paper, can be labelled by means of any three distinct numerical values, merely as place
keepers so that statistical analysis can be applied. It will be shown below, however, that
when it concerns the dynamics of the state of mind, the eigenvalue diﬀerences do play an
important role, and hence they cannot be chosen arbitrarily, just as in quantum theory.
Dynamics
Having established the framework for representing the cognitive state of mind, it will be
of interest to explore how the state changes in time. To this end I will be working under the
hypothesis that a given state |ψ⟩of a person’s mind changes only by transfer of information.
It is, of course, possible that an isometric motion analogous to unitary motion of quantum
theory that does not exchange information can change the state, and if so this will be
given by an orthogonal transformation. However, without a clear physical or psychological
evidence indicating the existence of such a symmetry, I will not consider this possibility,
and focus instead on universally acknowledged empirical fact that information acquisition
(or loss) changes states of minds. The question is, in which way?
To understand dynamics, I will be borrowing ideas from communication theory. Focusing
on a single decision to start with, let ˆX denote the decision or choice observable, with
eigenvalues {xk}k=1,...,N. These eigenvalues for now merely label diﬀerent alternatives. The
eigenstate |xj⟩of ˆX, satisfying ˆX|xj⟩= xj|xj⟩, thus represents the state of mind in which
the jth alternative has been chosen. Prior to an alternative being chosen, the state is in a
superposition |ψ⟩= ∑
kck|xk⟩. The state will change when the person acquires information
relevant to decision making. This information is rarely perfect. In communication theory,
anything that obscures ﬁnding the value of the quantity of interest is modelled in terms of
noise. Let ˆεdenote this noise. Here, ˆεcan take discrete values, or more commonly continuous
values. I will consider the latter case so that ˆεacts on an inﬁnite dimensional Hilbert space
H∞ distinct from the state space HN. The noise arises from external environments E.
For simplicity I will assume that the state of noise is pure, and is given by |η⟩= η(y) ∈
H∞, although a mixed state can equally be treated. Then initially the state of mind of a
person attempting to make a decision and the state of the noise-inducing environment is
disentangled, and together is given by the product state |ψ⟩|η⟩.
Acquisition of partial information relevant to decision making can then be modelled by
5
observing the value of
ˆξ = ˆX+ ˆε.
Here, the sum is taken in the tensor-product space HN ⊗H∞. To understand the sum,
consider the case in which ˆε is ﬁnite and can take three values ε1,ε2,ε3, while the decision
is binary, represented by the values x0 and x1. Then ˆξ is a 6 ×6 matrix with the eigenvalues
x0 + ε1, x0 + ε2, x0 + ε3, x1 + ε0, x1 + ε1, x1 + ε3. In general, the eigenvalues of ˆξ are
highly (typically N-fold) degenerate. The form that ˆξ takes is of course nothing more than
a signal-plus-noise decomposition in classical communication theory [12]. The ‘signal’ term,
more generally, will be a function F( ˆX) of ˆX, but for simplicity I will assume the function
to be linear because the choice of F(x) is context dependant.
Once the value of the information-providing observable ˆξ is measured, the initially-
disentangled state
|ψ⟩|η⟩=
∑
k
√pkη(y)|xk⟩
becomes an entangled state. In quantum mechanics, the transformation of the state after
measurement is given by the von Neumann-L¨ uders projection postulate. That is, writing
ˆΠξ =
∑
k
δ(y−ξ+ xk)|xk⟩⟨xk|
for the projection operator onto the subspace of HN ⊗H∞ spanned by the eigenstates of
ˆξ with the eigenvalue ξ, the projection postulate asserts that the state of the system after
information acquisition is
ˆρξ =
ˆΠξ|ψ⟩|η⟩⟨ψ|⟨η|ˆΠξ
tr
(
ˆΠξ|ψ⟩|η⟩⟨ψ|⟨η|ˆΠξ
).
A short calculation then shows that this is given more explicitly by
ˆρξ =
∑
k,l
√pkplη(ξ−xk)η(ξ−xl) |xk⟩⟨xl|∑
mpmη2(ξ−xm) .
Two interesting observations that follow are in order. First, the density matrix by construc-
tion is a projection operator onto a random pure state |ψ(ξ)⟩given by
|ψ(ξ)⟩=
∑
k
√
πk(ξ) |xk⟩,
where ξ is the random variable with the density p(y) = ∑
mpmη2(y −xm) modelled by
the observable ˆξ along with the initial state |ψ⟩|η⟩. That is, given the state |ψ⟩|η⟩, the
probability of the measurement outcome of the observation lying in the interval [y,y + dy] is
given byp(y)dy. Second, the coeﬃcients of the random pure state agrees with the conditional
probability of the choice given by the Bayes formula:
πk(ξ) = pkη2(ξ−xk)∑
mpmη2(ξ−xm).
That is, πk(ξ) is the probability that the kth alternative is chosen, conditional on observing
the value ξ of ˆξ. It follows that the von Neumann-L¨ uders projection postulate of quantum
6
theory not only gives the correct classical result (as already observed in [6, 11] with a diﬀerent
construction) but also provides a simple geometric interpretation of the Bayes formula. This
follows because the L¨ uders state|ψ(ξ)⟩associated to a degenerate measurement outcome ξ
is given by the orthogonal projection of the initial state onto Hilbert subspace associated to
this outcome. Hence |ψ(ξ)⟩is the closest state on the constrained subspace in terms of the
Bhattachayya distance [17] to the initial state |ψ⟩|η⟩.
It is worth remarking that an alternative interpretation of the von Neumann-L¨ uders pro-
jection postulate can be given in terms of the so-called free energy principle [18]. Intuitively,
this principle asserts that the change in the state of mind follows a path that on average min-
imises elements of surprises. In the present context, the degree of surprise can be measured
in terms of the level of uncertainty. Suppose that the state of mind after information acqui-
sition becomes ˆµξ that is diﬀerent from the L¨ uders state ˆρξ. Then the level of uncertainty
associated with the choice observable ˆX resulting from ˆµξ, conditional on the observed value
ξ of ˆξ, is given by
tr
([
ˆX−tr( ˆXˆµξ)
]2
ˆρξ
)
= tr
(
ˆX2 ˆρξ
)
−
(
tr
(
ˆXˆρξ
))2
+
(
tr
(
ˆXˆδξ
))2
,
where I have written ˆδξ = ˆµξ−ˆρξ for the deviation. Because the ﬁrst two terms on the right
side is the conditional variance of ˆX, which is positive and is independent of ˆµξ, to minimise
the expected uncertainty, and hence the surprise, for all ˆX and ξ, it has to be that ˆδξ = 0.
It follows that among all the states consistent with the observation, L¨ uders state is unique
in that it minimises the expected level of future surprise, as measured by the uncertainty.
I might add parenthetically that a psychologist wishing to predict the statistics of the
behaviour of a person who has acquired information relevant to decision making willa priori
not know the observed value ofξ. Hence in this case the density matrix ˆρξ has to be averaged
over ξ, but the denominator of ˆρξ is just the densityp(y) for ξ, so the averaged density matrix
is given by
E[ˆρξ] =
∑
k,l
√pkplΛ(ωkl) |xk⟩⟨xl|,
where ωkl = xk −xl and
Λ(ω) =
∫ ∞
−∞
η(y)η(y−ω)dy.
Evidently, 0 ≤Λ(ωkl) ≤1 and Λ( ωkk) = 1 for all k,l, but because the initial state of mind
|ψ⟩⟨ψ|in this basis has the matrix elements {√pkpl}, it follows that an external observer
(e.g., a psychologist) will perceive a decoherence eﬀect whereby the oﬀ-diagonal elements of
the reduced density matrix are damped.
It is at this point that I wish to comment on the numerical values of the diﬀerences{ωkl}.
While there is no reason why Λ( ω) should be monotonic in ω (unless η(y) is unimodal), it
will certainly be the case that the decoherence eﬀect is more pronounced for large values of
ω. That is, Λ( ω) ≪1 for ω ≫1. For the same token, the values of ωkl will directly aﬀect
the conditional probabilities {πk(ξ)}. Therefore, while the values of ωkl, and hence those
of xk, can be chosen arbitrarily to describe the statistics of the initial state of mind, once
dynamics is taken into account (what happens after information acquisition), it becomes
evident that they cannot be chosen arbitrarily.
A better intuition behind this observation can be gained by reverting back to ideas of
signal detection in communication theory. For this purpose, consider a binary decision.
7
Supposed that the two eigenvalues of ˆX, labelling the two decisions, are chosen to be, say,
±0.1 and suppose that the noise distribution η2(y) is normal centred at zero, with a small
standard deviation. In this case, observed outcomes of ˆξ will most likely take values close to
zero. As a consequence, a single observation of ˆξwill reduce on average the initial uncertainty
only by a very small amount. In contrast, suppose that the two eigenvalues of ˆX are chosen
to be ±10, but the noise is the same as before. Then the observation will almost certainly
yield the outcome that is close to +10 or −10. Hence the uncertainty in this case has been
reduced to virtually zero after a single observation. This extreme example shows how it is
not possible to label diﬀerent choice alternatives by arbitrary numerical numbers, while at
the same time to adequately model the dynamics of the state of mind.
In the event where a model η(y) for the state of noisy environment exists, it is possible in
principle to estimate the eigenvalue diﬀerences {ωij}by studying how much a person’s views
shifted from the acquisition of the noisy information. This is because the average reduction
of uncertainty, as measured by entropy change or the decoherence rate, is determined by the
eigenvalue diﬀerences {ωij}.
Sequential updating
I have illustrated how the cognitive state of mind of a person in relation to a given
choice changes after a single acquisition of information. A more interesting, as well as
realistic, situation concerns a sequential updating of the state of mind as more and more
noisy information is revealed. In this case the information-providing observable ˆξt is a time
series. As a simple example that naturally extends the previous one I will consider the
following time series
ˆξt = ˆXt+ ˆεt,
where I will assume that the noise term ˆ εt is modelled by a standard Brownian motion
{Bt}multiplied by the identity operator of the Hilbert space H∞. The ‘signal’ component,
more generally, can be given by
∫t
0 Fs( ˆX)ds, but again for simplicity I will assume that the
function Ft(x) is linear for all t. In fact, even more generally, the range of alternatives ˆX
itself can also be time dependent, but I will not consider this case here.
In this example, what happens to the state of mind can be worked out by discretising the
time and taking the limit. Starting from time zero, over a small time increment dtthe initial
state |ψ⟩|η⟩is projected to the L¨ uders state ˆΠξdt |ψ⟩|η⟩, suitably normalised, in accordance
with the projection postulate. In this case, the noise is normally distributed with mean zero
and variance dt, so that η(y) is just the square-root of the corresponding Gaussian density
function. Then after another time interval d t we apply the projection operator again, and
repeat the procedure till time t. Finally, taking the limit, a calculation shows that the
L¨ uders state, after monitoring the observableˆξt up to time t, is given by
|ψ(ξt)⟩= 1√Φt
∑
k
√pke
1
2 xkξt−1
4 x2
kt|xk⟩,
where ξt = Xt + Bt and X is the random variable represented on the Hilbert space HN
by the operator ˆX along with the initial state |ψ⟩, and Φ t = ∑
kpke
1
2 kkξt−1
4 x2
kt gives the
normalisation.
Because we have an explicit expression that monitors the change in the state of mind
as information is revealed, there is a priori no reason to identify the diﬀerential equation
8
to which |ψ(ξt)⟩is the solution. Nevertheless, the exercise of working out the dynamical
equation provides several new insights worth discussing. The detailed mathematical steps
required here to work out the dynamics has been outlined in [19], so I shall not repeat this.
It suﬃces to say that the L¨ uders state is a function oftand ξt, where the latter is a Brownian
motion with a random drift. Hence the relevant calculus to apply is that of Ito: one Taylor
expands |ψ(ξt)⟩in tand ξt, and retain leading-order terms, bearing in mind that (dξt)2 = dt.
Then it follows that
d|ψ(ξt)⟩= −1
8( ˆX−⟨ ˆX⟩t)2|ψ(ξt)⟩dt+ 1
2( ˆX−⟨ ˆX⟩t)|ψ(ξt)⟩dWt,
where ⟨ˆX⟩t = ⟨ψ(ξt)|ˆX|ψ(ξt)⟩/⟨ψ(ξt)|ψ(ξt)⟩and where
dWt = dξt −⟨ ˆX⟩tdt.
The process {Wt}deﬁned in this way is in fact a standard Brownian motion, known as the
innovations process [20]. This process has the interpretation of revealing new information.
That is, while the time series {ˆξt}contains new as well as previously known information
about the impending choice to be made, the process {Wt}merely contains information that
was not known previously.
There are two important observations that follow. First, the evolution of the state of
mind is not directly generated by the noise {Bt}, nor by the observation {ˆξt}. Rather,
it is the innovations process that drives the dynamics. But this is the case only if the
state of mind changes in such a way to continuously minimise uncertainties. Because the
expectation of the cumulative uncertainty is the entropy [19], it follows that according to
the present framework, the tendency towards low entropy states required in biology [18],
which forms the basis of the free energy principle, emerges naturally. In particular, the
implication here based on the projection postulate is that the state of mind changes only in
accordance with the arrival of new information; it will not change spontaneously of its own
otherwise. Second, while the analysis presented here can be deduced as a result of standard
least-square estimation theory [20, 21], I have derived these results using the von Neumann-
L¨ uders projection postulate of quantum theory. It follows that the informationally eﬃcient
dynamical behaviour, in the sense of minimising surprises, of a system, is applicable not
only to the state of mind but also to quantum systems. An analogous point of view, based
on the free energy principle, has recently been proposed elsewhere [22].
I might add that for the purpose of psychological modelling, the averaged reduced density
matrix ˆρt = E[ˆρξt ] can be seen to obey the dynamical equation
∂ˆρt
∂t = ˆXˆρt ˆX−1
2
(
ˆX2 ˆρt + ˆρt ˆX2
)
.
This, of course, is just the Lindblad equation generated by the decision ˆX.
Projecting down the dynamics
One advantage of working with the mathematical formalism of quantum theory in mod-
elling psychological states of minds is the deeper insights that it can uncover (cf. [8]). To
this end I note that although I have deﬁned the state of mind as a vector in Hilbert space,
9
(a) Negative gradient ﬂow of the variance
 (b) Gradient ﬂow of the mean
Figure 1: Flow of the negative gradient of the variance. In the case of a decision involving three
alternatives, the corresponding state space M is a real projective plane. This two-dimensional
manifold is not orientable and cannot be embedded in three dimensions, however, it can be inter-
preted as a sphere with antipodal points being identiﬁed. Thus the ﬂow on M can be captured by
examining the ﬂow on the positive octant of the sphere. Here, a three-fold decision is modelled by
a choice observable ˆX with eigenvalues x1 = 1, x2 = 2, and x3 = 3. The three axes, correspond-
ing to the three corners of the octant, represent the three eigenstates of ˆX with no uncertainty.
The ﬂow −∇aV generated by the negative gradient of the uncertainty (shown in the left panel)
takes any initial state into one of the states with no uncertainty — this is the tendency towards
least surprises. The gradient ∇aX of the mean is shown on the right panel for comparison. This
term is multiplied by the Brownian increment d Wt, which is normally distributed with mean zero
and variance d t, so at any moment in time the direction of the ﬂow generated by the Brownian
ﬂuctuation can go either way.
what I have in mind really is a projective Hilbert space consisting of rays through the ori-
gin of the Hilbert space. The idea is as follows. In probability, one can say, for instance,
that the likelihood of an event happening is 0.3, or three out of ten, or 30% — all of these
statements convey the same idea. The total probability being equal to one is merely a
convenient convention that does not carry any signiﬁcance. Putting it diﬀerently, working
with the convention that the expectation of any decision ˆX in a state |ψ⟩is given by the
ratio ⟨ˆX⟩= ⟨ψ|ˆX|ψ⟩/⟨ψ|ψ⟩, it is evident that the expectation values are independent of
the overall scaling of the state |ψ⟩by a nonzero constant. Hence the Hilbert space vector
|ψ⟩carries one psychologically irrelevant degree of freedom. When this degree of freedom is
eliminated by the identiﬁcation |ψ⟩∼ λ|ψ⟩for any λ̸= 0, one arrives at a projective Hilbert
space, otherwise known as the real projective space. This is a real manifold M of dimension
N −1, endowed with a Riemannian metric induced by the underlying probabilistic rules
given by the von Neumann-L¨ uders projection postulate [23].
Let {ψa}denote local coordinates for points on M. A point on M thus represents a
state of mind corresponding to a family of vectors λ|ψ⟩, λ ̸= 0, on Hilbert space. For any
10
representative |ψ⟩of that family corresponding to the point ψ ∈M, consider a function on
M through the expectation X(ψ) = ⟨ψ|ˆX|ψ⟩/⟨ψ|ψ⟩. With this convention, and writing ∇a
for the gradient vector, the dynamical equation for the state of mind |ψ(ξt)⟩, when projected
down to M, is given by
dψa = −1
16∇aVX dt+ 1
4∇aXdWt,
where VX(ψ) = ⟨ψ|( ˆX −X(ψ))2|ψ⟩/⟨ψ|ψ⟩is the function on M that corresponds to the
variance of ˆX in the state |ψ⟩. The mathematical analysis leading to this result have essen-
tially been provided in [24, 25], which will not be repeated here. The important observation
is that the drift term (the coeﬃcient of d t) that generates a tendency ﬂow on the state
space M is given by the negative gradient of the variance (uncertainty). Therefore, on the
state space there is a tendency of driving the state of mind into one of the states with no
uncertainty — this is the ﬂow that attempts to reduce surprises. It also follows that if the
state of mind is in the vicinity of one of the deﬁnite states of no uncertainty, then it will
be diﬃcult to escape from that neighbourhood — a phenomenon that I referred to as a
tenacious Bayesian behaviour [14]. I will have more to comment on this below. In Figure 1
an example of the negative gradient ﬂow of the uncertainty on the state space is sketched,
along with the gradient ﬂow ∇aX of the mean.
It is worth remarking that in principle properties of the dynamics just outlined can be
inferred from the squared amplitudes
πkt = Φ−1
t pkexkξt−1
2 x2
kt
of the coeﬃcients of |ψ(ξt)⟩, which evidently contain as much information as the state|ψ(ξt)⟩
itself. Indeed, starting from the expression for πkt, which can be deduced by use of the
Bayes formula, one can apply the Ito calculus to deduce the dynamical equation satisﬁed
by πkt, known in communication theory as the Kushner equation [26]. However, πkt is a
martingale, that is, on average a conserved process. In particular, the process has no drift
(the coeﬃcient of d t in the Kushner equation for πkt is zero), so by simply examining the
Kushner equation for πkt it is diﬃcult to infer key properties of the dynamics. In contrast,
the surprise-minimising feature of the dynamics becomes immediately apparent once the
process is projected to the state space M.
Diﬀerence between psychological and quantum states
I have thus far emphasised the similarities in the state of mind as represented by a Hilbert
space vector (or a density matrix), and the physical state of a quantum system as represented
by the same scheme. There are, however, some important diﬀerences. The most important
one, in my view, can be described through the following example. Suppose that the state
of a quantum system is very close to one of the eigenstates |xk⟩of an observable ˆX, and
that the measurement outcome yields the value xl, l ̸= k, for which the probability would
have been very small. In this case, the interpretation of the event is the obvious one: a rare
event has occurred. Now suppose instead that the state of mind is very close to one of the
‘certain’ states |xk⟩, in a situation where there is a correct choice to be made (for example,
in deciding what had actually happened at an event in the past — as opposed to choices
for which there need not be ‘correct’ outputs). In this case, if the correct choice happens
to be |xl⟩, l ̸= k, it does not mean that an unlikely event had occurred. Rather, it means
11
that the initial state of mind was a misguided one. Putting the matter diﬀerently, while
a state of a quantum system represents the physical reality of the system, a state of mind
merely represents the person’s perception of the state of the world. This diﬀerence between
objective and subjective probabilities has important implications discussed below. (There
is, of course, the suggestion that the state of a quantum system itself is entirely subjective
[27], but this idea will not be explored here.)
The subjective nature of psychological states gives rise to the following challenge. In
psychology, it is not uncommon for a group of people having varying dispositions be given
some information (for example, an article to read or a video clip to watch), and their
responses are examined. One such example is seen in the study of conﬁrmation bias — a
bias towards information that conﬁrm their views [28, 29]. The idea is to investigate how
people having diverging opinions respond diﬀerently to the ‘same’ information. The issue
here, however, is that the information content of the given message such as an article or
a video clip is diﬀerent to people with diﬀerent opinions, even though it is an identical
information source.
To explain this more concretely, consider the simple example considered above. Suppose
that the preference, or the opinion, of one person on a topic is represented by the choice
observable ˆX. Then the information-providing observable representing an article discussing
this topic is given by ˆξ = ˆX+ˆε. If a second person with a diﬀerent opinion represented by the
choice observable ˆY were given the same article, then the information-bearing observable for
the second person is given by ˆη= ˆY + ˆε. They are diﬀerent. Hence, just because two people
are given, say, the same article to read, to assert that they are given the same information
is factually false. One important consequence in psychology is that the various conclusions
drawn from such experiments on how people’s behaviour might deviate from the rational
Bayesian updating require fundamental reexamination.
The subjective nature of psychological states also gives rise to a mathematical challenge.
In communication theory, one is typically concerned with well-established communication
channels, where the signal transmitted is assumed to represent an objective reality. There-
fore, there is no ambiguity in interpreting the information-carrying time series{ˆξt}. However,
if diﬀerent receivers were to interpret the ‘same’ message diﬀerently, and if there is a need
to apply statistical analysis on the behaviours of diﬀerent people, then the question arises
as to which information process (called ‘ﬁltration’ in probability) one should be using for
statistical analysis. To my knowledge, such a situation has hardly been examined in the
vast literature of probability and stochastic analysis.
Limitation of classical reasoning
Thus far I have assumed, for deﬁniteness, that all decisions are compatible. What this
means is that the quantum formalism advocated here, while eﬀective, can be reduced, if
necessary, to a purely classical probabilistic formulation. It seems to me that this assump-
tion does not fully reﬂect the reality, and that it is plausible that not all decisions can be
made simultaneously by human brains. Indeed, there are empirical examples in behavioural
psychology that strongly indicate that not all decisions or opinions are compatible [8, 30, 31].
If so, the observables representing these choices will not commute.
The issue with the classical updating of likelihoods based on the Bayes formula is that it
is not well suited to characterise changes of the contexts, that is, changes of sample spaces
— represented, for example, by an arrival of information that reveals a previously unknown
12
alternative. In such a scenario, the prior probability of the new alternative is zero (because
it was not even known), whereas the posterior can be nonzero. Hence, in the language of
probability theory, the prior and the posterior are not absolutely continuous with respect
to each other, prohibiting the direct use of the Bayes formula. In contrast, such a change
of context can be modelled using incompatible observables, along with the von Neumann-
L¨ uders projection postulate.
To see this, suppose that the prior state of mind is given by |ψ⟩ = ∑
kck|xk⟩when
expanded in the eigenstates of ˆX, where cm = 0 for some m, and suppose that acquisition of
information takes the form ˆη= ˆY + ˆε, where ˆY cannot be diagonalised using the basis states
{|xk⟩}. Then it is possible that the L¨ uders stateˆΠη|ψ⟩/√⟨ψ|ˆΠη|ψ⟩resulting from information
acquisition, when expanded in {|xk⟩}, is such that cm ̸= 0, thus circumventing the constraint
of the classical Bayes formula. Therefore, in a situation whereby choice observables are not
compatible, the quantum-mechanical formalism proposed here and elsewhere [9] becomes
a necessity, for, the modelling of the dynamical behaviour of a person cannot be achieved
using the techniques of purely classical probability.
As a simple example, consider two binary (yes or no) decisions that are represented by
the choice observables
ˆX =
(
1 0
0 −1
)
and ˆY =
(
cos φ sin φ
sin φ −cos φ
)
.
Evidently, ˆX and ˆY cannot be diagonalised simultaneously, unless φ= 0 (mod 2π). Suppose
further that the initial state of mind of a person is represented by a Hilbert space vector
|ψ⟩=
(
cos 1
2 θ
sin 1
2 θ
)
for some θ. Then the probability that the person giving a ‘yes’ answer to question ˆX is
cos2 1
2 θ; whereas if question ˆY were asked instead, then the likelihood of giving an aﬃrmative
answer is cos 2 1
2 (θ−φ). Note that strictly speaking, according to the scheme introduced
here the state space for a pair of binary decisions is four-dimensional, if the two decisions
(questions) are simultaneously considered. However, here I am interested in the eﬀect of
questions being asked sequentially, and for this purpose a two-dimensional representation
suﬃces. Thus |ψ⟩is interpreted to represent an abstract state of mind for which a range
of binary questions may be asked. In quantum theory, such a special state is known as a
coherent state.
Now suppose that question ˆY is asked ﬁrst, and subsequently question ˆX is asked. Then
from the projection postulate, the probability of giving a ‘yes’ answer to question ˆX, irre-
spective of which answer was given to the ﬁrst question, is 1
4 (2 + cos(θ) + cos(θ−2φ)). For
φ̸= 0 this is diﬀerent from the a priori probability cos2 1
2 θ of answering ‘yes’ to question ˆX.
In other words, the so-called law of total probability in the classical probability theory, that
the unconditional expectation of a conditional expectation equals the unconditional expec-
tation, is not applicable when dealing with incompatible propositions. Similarly, if question
ˆX is asked before question ˆY, then the probability of giving a ‘yes’ answer to question ˆY is
cos2 1
2 θcos2 1
2 φ+ sin2 1
2 θsin2 1
2 φ, which is diﬀerent from cos 2 1
2 (θ−φ) when φ̸= 0.
This example is perhaps the simplest one to demonstrate that answers to questions can
be dependant on the order in which questions are asked, provided that the questions are
not compatible (see [32], Appendix 2, for a discussion on the order dependence). A more
13
elaborate construction of this kind in higher dimension is found in [31]. At any rate, the
violation of the law of total probability shows that this empirical phenomenon of order-
dependence cannot be explained using compatible observables.
For a pair of binary choices, an attempt is made in [8] to explain the experiment discussed
in [33]. The data presented in [33] show that when people are asked if Clinton is honest,
about 50% answered ‘yes’, and if they are then asked if Gore is honest, 60% answered ‘yes’;
whereas if the order of the questions are reversed, then the ﬁgures change into 68% yes for
Gore followed by 60% yes for Clinton. Note however that the explanation of this eﬀect in
[8] is incomplete because only conditional probabilities are considered therein, whereas the
data in [33] concern total probabilities. The analysis of total probabilities considered here,
on the other, shows that by setting θ ≈9π/20 and φ≈π/15, the phenomenon reported in
[33] can be explained within the ±10% error margin.
Discussion
I have illustrated how the Hilbert-space formalism used in quantum theory is highly ef-
fective in modelling cognitive psychology, in particular, its dynamical aspects. In particular,
I have shown how an important feature of the dynamics associated with Bayesian updat-
ing, or equivalently with the von Neumann-L¨ uders projection, namely, of the uncertainty-
reducing trend, is made transparent in this formalism. This, in turn, provides an alternative
information-theoretic perspective on the free energy principle, due to the close relation be-
tween entropy and variance in communication theory.
One important consequence of the foregoing analysis is that states of low uncertainty are
always preferred ones, irrespective of whether they represent the correct choices. Therefore,
if the state of mind happens to be close to one of the false choices, then with a rational
updating it is diﬃcult to escape from this neighbourhood because to achieve this, entropy
has to increase before it can be decreased again, and this is counter to biological trends [34].
In such a situation, it appears that only the accidental eﬀect of noise, which otherwise is a
nuisance, can rescue the person from the false choice within a reasonable timescale, at least
when all choices are compatible to each other.
The situation changes once we accept the thesis of [8] that real-world decisions are never
compatible, thus making it a necessity to model cognitive behaviours using the quantum
formalism. To see this, consider a pair of maximally incompatible binary decisions modelled
by the pair
ˆX =
(
1 0
0 −1
)
and ˆY =
(
0 1
1 0
)
,
and suppose that the state of mind is given by
|ψ⟩= 1√
2
(
1
1
)
,
or a state very close to|ψ⟩. Because ˆY|ψ⟩= |ψ⟩, this means that the state of mind in relation
to decision ˆY is already ﬁxed to the alternative labelled by the eigenvalue +1, and that the
likelihood of choosing the other alternative labelled by the eigenvalue −1 is zero, or else
very close to zero anyhow. Suppose further that the ‘correct’ choice is the one labelled by
the eigenvalue −1 (in a situation where a correct alternative exists). The tenacious classical
Bayesian behaviour [14] then implies that providing partial information ˆ η = ˆY + ˆε about
14
the truth will have little impact. Instead, if the person is given information, not about the
choice ˆY, but about ˆX in the form ˆξ = ˆX+ ˆε, where the magnitude of noise ˆεis small, then
after acquisition of this information the state will change into one of the two possible L¨ uders
states. These two states will be close to one of the two eigenstates of ˆX. If subsequently
partial information ˆη= ˆY + ˆεis provided, then irrespective of which L¨ uders state is chosen,
the state of mind will now transform into one that is close to the truth. Thus the quantum
formalism opens up a new possibility that was unavailable with the classical reasonings.
Acknowledgements. The author thanks Bernhard Meister for stimulating discussion, and acknowledges
support from the EPSRC (EP/X019926) and the John Templeton Foundation (grant 62210). The opinions
expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the John
Templeton Foundation.
[1] Isham, C. (1995) Lectures on Quantum Theory. (London: Imperial College Press).
[2] Penrose, R. (1994) Shadows of the Mind. (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
[3] Vitiello, G. (2001) My Double Unveiled: The dissipative quantum model of brain. (Amsterdam
and Philadelphia: John Benjamin).
[4] Tegmark, M. (2000) Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. Physical Review
E61, 4194-4206.
[5] Plotnitsky, A. (2014) Are quantum-mechanical-like models possible, or necessary, outside
quantum physics? Physica Scripta T163, 014011.
[6] Ozawa, M. & Khrennikov, A. (2023) Nondistributivity of human logic and violation of response
replicability eﬀect in cognitive psychology. Journal of Mathematical Psychology112, 102739.
[7] Rao, C. R. (1945) Information and the accuracy attainable in the estimation of statistical
parameters. Bulletin of Calcutta Mathematical Society37, 81-91.
[8] Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2013) Can quantum probability provide a new direction
for cognitive modeling? Behavioral and Brain Sciences36, 255-327.
[9] Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2022) Quantum cognition. Annual Reviews of Psychology
73, 749-778.
[10] Busemeyer, J. R. & Bruza, P. D. (2012) Quantum Models of Cognition and Decision. (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press).
[11] Haven, E. & Khrennikov, A. (2016) Statistical and subjective interpretations of probability in
quantum-like models of cognition and decision making. Journal of Mathematical Psychology
74, 82-91.
[12] Wiener, N. (1948) Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Ma-
chine. (Boston: The Technology Press of the MIT).
[13] Friston, K., Kilner, J. & Harrison, L. (2006) A free energy principle for the brain. Journal of
Physiology – Pairs100, 70-87.
[14] Brody, D. C. (2022) Noise, fake news, and tenacious Bayesians. Frontiers in Psychology13,
797904.
[15] DeGroot, M. H. (1970) Optimal Statistical Decisions(New York: McGraw-Hill).
[16] Berger, J. O. (1985) Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis(New York: Spinger-
Verlag).
[17] Brody, D. C. & Hook, D. W. (2009) Information geometry in vapour-liquid equilibrium. Jour-
15
nal of PhysicsA42, 023001.
[18] Friston, K. (2010) The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuro-
science 11, 127-138.
[19] Brody, D. C. and Hughston, L. P. (2006) Quantum noise and stochastic reduction. Journal of
Physics A39, 833-876.
[20] Kailath, T. (1968) An innovations approach to least-squares estimation. Part I: Linear ﬁltering
in additive white noise. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control13, 646-655.
[21] Wonham, W. M. (1965) Some applications of stochastic diﬀerential equations to optimal
nonlinear ﬁltering. Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics: Control
A2, 347-369.
[22] Fields, C., Friston, K., Glazebrook, J. F. & Levin, M. (2022) A free energy principle for generic
quantum systems. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology173, 36-59.
[23] Brody, D. C. and Hughston, L. P. (1999) Geometrisation of statistical mechanics. Proceedings
of the Royal Society LondonA455, 1683-1715.
[24] Hughston, L. P. (1996) Geometry of stochastic state vector reduction. Proceedings of the Royal
Society LondonA452, 953-979.
[25] Brody, D. C. and Hughston, L. P. (2002) Stochastic reduction in nonlinear quantum mechanics.
Proceedings of the Royal Society LondonA458, 1117-1127.
[26] Kushner, H. J. On the diﬀerential equations satisﬁed by conditional probability densities
of Markov processes, with applications. Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics: Control A2, 106-119 (1964).
[27] Fuchs, C. A. & Schack, R. (2014) QBism and the Greeks: why a quantum state does not
represent an element of physical reality. Physica Scripta 90, 015104.
[28] Lord, C. G., Ross, L. & Lepper, M. R. (1979) Biased assimilation and attitude polarization:
The eﬀects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology37, 2098-2109.
[29] Nickerson, R. S. (1998) Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. Review
of General Psychology2, 175-220.
[30] Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2009) A quantum probability explanation for violations
of ‘rational’ decision theory. Proceedings of the Royal SocietyB276, 2171-2178.
[31] Basieva, I., Pothos, E. M., Trueblood, J., Khrennikov, A. & Busemeyer, J. (2017) Quantum
probability updating from zero priors (by-passing Cromwell’s rule). Journal of Mathematical
Psychology 77, 58-69.
[32] Mayer, P. A. (1995) Quantum Probability for Probabilists. 2nd ed. (Berlin: Springer).
[33] Moore, D. W. (2002) Measuring new types of question-order eﬀects: Additive and subtractive.
The Public Opinion Quarterly66, 80-91.
[34] Brody, D. C. & Trewavas, A. J. (2022) Biological eﬃciency in processing information.
arXiv:2209.11054.