Quantum Darwinism as a Darwinian process 
John Campbell  
 
Abstract 
The Darwinian nature of Wojciech Zurek’s theory of Quantum Darwinism is evaluated 
against the criteria of a Darwinian process as understood within Universal Darwinism. 
The characteristics of a Darwinian process are developed including the consequences of 
accumulated adaptations resulting in adaptive systems operating in accordance with 
Friston’s free energy principle and employing environmental simulations. Quantum 
theory, as developed in Zurek’s research program and encapsulated by his theory of 
Quantum Darwinism is discussed from the view that Zurek’s derivation of the 
measurement axioms implies that the evolution of a quantum system entangled with 
environmental entities is determined solely by the nature of the entangled system. There 
need be no further logical foundation.  Quantum Darwinism is found to conform to the 
Darwinian paradigm in unexpected detail and is thus may be considered a theory within 
the framework of Universal Darwinism. With the inclusion of Quantum Darwinism 
within Universal Darwinism and the explanatory power of Darwinian processes 
extended beyond biology and the social sciences to include the creation and evolution of 
scientific subject matter within particle physics, atomic physics and chemistry, it is 
suggested that Universal Darwinism may be considered a candidate ‘Theory of 
Everything’ as anticipated by David Deutsch. 
Introduction 
Wojciech Zurek’s theory of Quantum Darwinism (Zurek, 2009)posits a Darwinian 
process responsible for the emergence of classical reality from its quantum substrate. 
This theory explains information transfer between the quantum and classical realm 
during the process of decoherence as involving a ‘copy with selective retention’ 
mechanism characteristic of Darwinian processes.  
 
Quantum theory is frequently applied to microscopic systems near the limits of 
experimental perception. Such systems are often characterized as fundamental but this 
might be due more to the limitations of scientific technology than to an actual 
fundamental or simple nature. It is clear that our leading candidates for the next 
generation of fundamental physical theories will have to account for phenomena 
occurring at the Plank scale, that is about 10-35 meters (Smolin, 2001 ; Green 1999).  
When we consider that the diameter of a proton is about 10-14 meters we see that there is 
a greater relative difference in scale between the Plank scale and that of 'fundamental' 
particles than there is between that of fundamental particles and phenomena in our 
every day experience. There are well developed physical models that indicate quantum 
theory may apply at scales close to the plank scale (Markopoulou & Smolin, 2004). We 
might well expect there to be a good deal of emergent complexity and perhaps even 
layers of emergent phenomena below the scale of 'fundamental’ particles. This 
consideration may caution us against making assumptions concerning the complexity of 
quantum systems. 
 
Universal Darwinism, the collection of scientific theories that employ a Darwinian 
process to explain the creation and evolution of their subject matter, offers such 
explanations throughout a wide range of the biological and social sciences (Campbell, 
2009).  The question examined here is whether Quantum Darwinism might be 
interpreted as a theory extending the scope of Universal Darwinism into the realm of 
quantum phenomena: particle physics, atomic physics and chemistry amongst others.  
 
Answering this question may be reduced to determining if the Darwinian process of 
Quantum Darwinism as elucidated by Zurek and colleagues is a Darwinian process as 
understood by Universal Darwinism.  
 
Universal Darwinism considers a Darwinian process as a substrate-neutral algorithm 
that may be extracted from Darwin’s theory of natural selection. This algorithm is 
composed of three steps: replication or copying, variations amongst the copies, and 
selective survival of the copies determined by which variations they possess. It has been 
shown that any entity embodying this algorithm will evolve and will evolve to be better 
at surviving. A Darwinian process operating as a system’s evolutionary mechanism may 
often result in the system becoming an adaptive system. Adaptive systems may be 
characterized as having an internal model of their environment which is maintained 
through Bayesian updating and subject to the free energy principle (Friston, 2007). 
They also tend to accumulate adaptations that function through the principle of 
maximum entropy to place constraints on the system’s evolution to states of higher 
entropy (Campbell , 2009). 
 
Zurek (2009) has indicated that in his view Quantum Darwinism meets at least some of 
these criteria: 
 
In the end one might ask: “How Darwinian is Quantum Darwinism?” Clearly, 
there is survival of the fittest, and fitness is defined as in natural selection.  
 
However he also makes it clear the exact relationship between Quantum Darwinism and 
natural selection is murky and requires some clarification (Zurek, 2009): 
 
Is Quantum Darwinism (a process of multiplication of information about 
certain favored states that seem to be a “fact of quantum life”) in some way 
behind the familiar natural selection? I cannot answer this question, but neither 
can I resist raising it. 
 
This paper is an attempt to shed some light on these questions. Section I will examine 
the nature of Darwinian Processes as they have come to be developed within Universal 
Darwinism. Section II will examine the nature of Quantum Darwinism and Section III 
will evaluate Quantum Darwinism as a Darwinian process. Section IV discusses some of 
the many interpretational issues for quantum theory raised by Zurek’s work. 
 
I.  Darwinian Processes 
 
The algorithmic nature of natural selection allows its essential mechanism to be 
abstracted and hypothesized as a possible mechanism operating in the evolution of 
subject matter often other than biological. Numerous theories of this type abound in the 
social sciences and even in the hard sciences such as physics (Campbell, 2009).    
 
The essential abstraction from natural selection, which we are calling a Darwinian 
process, has been developed in the work of Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett and Susan 
Blackmore (amongst others) to consist of a three-step process: 
1) Replication of system. 
2) Inheritance of some characteristics that have variation amongst the offspring. 
3) Differential survival of the offspring according to which variable characteristics they 
possess. 
 
It has been proposed that any system adhering to this three-step algorithm, regardless 
of its substrate, must evolve and will evolve in the direction of an increased ability to 
survive (Dawkins, 1976; Dennett, 1995; Blackmore, 1995). 
 
The physical mechanisms instantiated by Darwinian processes that bestow enhanced 
survivability are referred to as adaptations. Adaptations are usually discovered through 
processes with a random 'trial and error' component, such as genetic mutation, but the 
greater survivability they bestow allows them to become widespread within the 
population. Systems with long evolutionary histories come to accumulate many 
adaptations. Indeed any organism may be considered as largely an accumulation of 
adaptations built up over evolutionary time. 
 
Given the second law of thermodynamics, the survivability of a low entropy system is 
highly unlikely and must entail an intricate balancing of low entropy within the system 
against an increase of environmental entropy. This complex balancing requirement 
implies a deep ‘knowledge’ of the environment by the system. Theorists such as Henry 
Plotkin (1993) have concluded that adaptations must contain detailed information 
concerning their environment to the extent that they can be considered as a form of 
knowledge. 
 
For this reason a Darwinian process that has been in operation for a significant period of 
time may become a good deal more sophisticated than the bare bones Darwinian 
algorithm might indicate. Take for example natural selection, the basic Darwinian 
process operating in the biological realm. The base ‘copy with selective retention’ 
algorithm is still in effect but has been complemented with an array of embellishments 
increasing its effectiveness. For instance it is a consensus amongst those who research 
the subject that DNA, the substance used in constructing genetic copies, is not the 
original substance used. At some point the use of DNA evolved and completely replaced 
the original mechanism. Other embellishments such as sexual reproduction have also 
added to the complexity with which the basic algorithm is carried out. 
 
Such enhancements to the Darwinian process also bestow greater survivability and are 
thus also adaptations. Once a Darwinian process has evolved a sufficient depth of 
adaptations it may be considered an adaptive system. Karl Friston (2007) defines the 
general characteristics of an adaptive system as one that can react to changes in its 
environment by changing its interactions with the environment to optimize the results 
for itself. He examines the system in term of three features or variables: the system 
itself, the effect of the environment on the system and the effect of the system on the 
environment. These three features are integrated via an internal model that resides 
within the system. Friston has shown that the measures taken by adaptive systems in 
order to optimize their interaction with the environment can be understood via the Free 
Energy Principle: an adaptive system will attempt to minimize the free energy which 
bounds the ‘surprise’ resulting from its actual experience in the environment. In other 
words the system will act so as to minimize the prediction error of its internal model. 
 
The internal model is constructed in a Bayesian process that makes inferences from 
environmental data and also utilizes knowledge of the actions which the system can take 
to influence outcomes in the environment. Examples of such internal models residing 
within adaptive systems may include genetics residing within organisms, mental models 
residing within brains and business plans residing within corporations. 
 
Let's say we see something out of the corner of our eye that might be important. Because 
we cannot see the object very well we may have trouble assigning accurate probabilities 
to the numerous imaginable possibilities. Being adaptive systems we might turn our 
head and/or eyeballs and bring the thing into focus. We gain a pertinent data set and 
update, in a Bayesian manner, the probabilities associated with our internal model of 
the external world in conformance with this data. We change the way we interact with 
our environment by bringing a potentially important aspect of our environment into 
focus. We are now better informed and in a better position to optimize our response.  
 
The system’s interaction with its environment must be designed to optimize the 
outcome for itself. Thus an adaptive system must envision the optimal but realistic 
outcome of environmental interactions and execute those actions under its control 
necessary to achieve the envisioned outcome. 
 
From this view the modeling performed by an adaptive system functions as a simulation 
of its environmental interactions and is thus a form of computation. The theory of 
computation as outlined by Turing and the Church-Turing-Deutsch principle makes the 
claim that there exist universal computing machines capable of processing all 
computable functions. David Deutsch has shown that the composition of this underlying 
class of computable functions is not defined by logic or mathematics but rather by the 
laws of nature. What is computable are those functions where nature has provided the 
machinery capable of performing the algorithm. In Deutsch’s words (Deutsch, 1985):  
 
The reason why we find it possible to construct, say, electronic calculators, and 
indeed why we can perform mental arithmetic, cannot be found in mathematics 
or logic. The reason is that the laws of physics „happen to‟ permit the existence of 
physical models for the operations of arithmetic such as addition, subtraction 
and multiplication. 
 
Some researchers consider the computational aspect of adaptive systems as central to 
understanding them. Nobel laureate Sydney Brenner (1999) has called for biological 
science to focus on developing the theoretical capabilities required to compute 
organisms’ phenotype from their genotype. This approach is judged to have explanatory 
potential as he characterizes biological systems themselves as essentially information 
processing machines. 
 
It is interesting that we find computational machinery central to the functioning of 
adaptive systems found in nature and that it is such computational machinery found in 
nature that underlies the theory of computation. 
 
Adaptive systems, by this definition, contain a good deal of internal machinery. They are 
complex, low entropy structures. The primary outcome of environmental interactions 
that any adaptive system must achieve in order for it to be an optimal encounter is to 
retain its low entropy structure, to survive intact. This is not a trivial accomplishment, as 
the second law of thermodynamics states that such outcomes are extremely rare and 
that their rarity increases exponentially with time and the amount of matter within the 
system.  
 
An adaptive system must orchestrate encounters with its environment in such a way as 
to maintain its own low entropy state at the expense of increased entropy in the 
environment. Selecting and executing these rare outcomes requires knowledge; both 
knowledge of the causes operating in the environment and of how other entities existing 
in the environment can be exploited to maintain the system’s low entropy state. 
 
For example if we consider life forms as adaptive systems we should expect them to 
utilize adaptive mechanisms for lowering entropy. Sunlight is an abundant energy 
source at the earth’s surface but only extremely specific encounters with this energy will 
result in work being done in the service of local entropy reduction. Life acquired 
knowledge to perform this feat billions of years ago when it evolved photosynthesis and 
this knowledge has since become ubiquitous amongst the plant kingdom. 
Photosynthesis causes energy in sunlight to be transferred to a high energy bond in 
molecules of ATP. The energy in this molecular bond is then used as a resource for 
performing work through complex chemical processes which in the end serve to retain 
the organism’s low entropy state. 
 
The knowledge required to perform photosynthesis and to use the ATP molecule is 
contained in the genetic code of organisms and this knowledge is passed between 
generations through copying of the organisms’ genomes. These adaptations were 
created and have evolved to their present states due to the operation of the Darwinian 
process called natural selection. 
 
All life forms possess these internal models in the form of genetic molecules, which are 
central to their functioning as adaptive systems.  
 
The principle of Maximum Entropy requires systems to move to states of highest 
entropy consistent with the constraints operating on the system. The ability of adaptive 
systems to maintain their low entropy state must therefore be explainable in terms of 
the constraints they deploy against increasing entropy. These constraints are precisely 
the adaptations developed during the evolution of the system. In our example of the 
production and consumption of ATP molecules within organisms those constraints 
often take the form of enzymes which constrain the system’s chemical pathways to 
follow a specified course. These enzymes are directly coded for in the organism’s DNA. 
Thus the knowledge implicit with their entropy-reducing abilities is contained in the 
organisms’ internal models. 
 
At the heart of Bayesian probability is the notion of updating: our beliefs in a hypothesis 
should be updated whenever pertinent new data becomes available. Bayes’ Theorem 
provides the exact measure by which our confidence in a hypothesis should change with 
a given piece of new data.  The essence of the theorem is the common sense notion that 
our confidence should be adjusted in accordance with the extent to which the hypothesis 
or model enhances our ability to predict the new data. 
 
This theorem has been shown to be the unique mathematical description of how 
knowledge may be accumulated (Jaynes, 1985). It is a signature characteristic of a 
Darwinian process and is a central mechanism in an adaptive system’s ability to model 
its situation (Campbell, 2009). A consequence of the importance of Bayesian updating is 
that we see evidence of its operation wherever knowledge accumulates in nature, 
whether in genetics, brain functioning or science. 
 
In the course of this analysis of Darwinian processes we have developed a detailed a set 
of criteria against which any prospective Darwinian process, such as Quantum 
Darwinism, may be compared. These criteria include: 
1. The operation of a three step ‘copy with selective retention’ algorithm. 
2. Operation as an adaptive system where the system, the effect of the environment 
on the system and the effect of the system on the environment are modeled 
internally and the system conforms to Friston’s free energy principle. The 
simulation of the system’s environmental interactions may be understood as 
computation. 
3. Maintenance of the internal model’s accuracy through Bayesian updating. 
4. Production of adaptations which utilize the principle of maximum entropy to 
maintain the system’s low entropy state. 
 
II. Quantum Darwinism 
The research program into the nature of quantum systems conducted by Wojciech Zurek 
of Los Alamos National Laboratory and colleagues has spanned more than 25 years and 
has identified and developed a number of novel processes and constructs. The most 
important of these might include: decoherence, einselection, envariance and the theory 
of Quantum Darwinism. The theoretical advances gained by this program have enabled 
Zurek to derive what have commonly been considered two axioms of quantum theory 
from the remaining three.  
 
Quantum theory is often presented as a derivation from a set of axioms. A common set 
of axioms are: 
1) The state of a quantum system is represented by a vector in its Hilbert space. 
2) Evolutions are unitary (i.e., generated by Schrodinger equation). 
3) Immediate repetition of a measurement yields the same outcome. 
4) Measurement outcome is one of the orthonormal states, the eigenstates of the 
measured observable. 
5) The probability pk of finding an outcome   sk    in a measurement of a quantum 
system that was previously prepared in the state  ψ   is given by  sk  ψ  2. 
 
Decoherence occurs when information is copied from a quantum system to its 
environment. This process, often referred to as a measurement, has proven an 
unresolved interpretational quandary for quantum theory since the Bohr-Einstein 
debates occurring during the first part of the last century and has become known as the 
measurement problem. The problem arises as many consider the axioms to contain 
seeming contradictions; axiom 2 requires a quantum system to evolve via the 
Schrodinger equation in a mathematically smooth, deterministic and continuous 
manner but axiom 4 and axiom 5 require the quantum system to jump in a 
discontinuous manner, upon measurement, to a specific state, one often much different 
from the state to which it had evolved prior to the measurement. 
 
Zurek’s resolution is to show that the two problem axioms are implied by the other three 
(Zurek, 2009).  The proof of this derivation reveals that much of the information 
contained in the state vector after a period of unitary evolution cannot survive its being 
copied into the environment. Only a subset can survive the transfer. Axiom 3 requires 
that the information that survives in the systems state vector after the transfer is 
consistent with that copied to the environment resulting in a seemingly discontinuous 
change in the state vector.  
 
Theoretically decoherence has been understood as consisting of two processes roughly 
equivalent to axioms 4 and 5 (Zurek, 2009). The first process is named ‘environment 
induced superselection’ or einselection. When a quantum system becomes entangled 
with an entity in its environment it is properties of the environmental entity that 
determine the type of information which can be copied from the quantum system into 
that environment. For instance some environments may be structured to receive 
information on position and others to receive information on momentum. 
Mathematically the subset of information that can survive transfer to an environment is 
restricted to pointer states of the system. These pointer states are the eigenstates of 
axiom 4 and may be predicted as they are those which will leave the system in the lowest 
entropy state available (Zurek, 2009). Conversely the ability of the environment to 
receive information from the quantum system is dependent on its ability to increase 
entropy (Zwolak, Quan, & Zurek, 2009). 
 
The second major simplification of quantum theory produced by Zurek’s program was 
the derivation of axiom 5 using symmetry properties of the entangled quantum system 
and environmental entities. This process, environment–assisted invariance or 
envariance, provides a probabilistic prediction of the measurement value.  
 
Importantly both of these simplifications provide predictions regarding measurement; 
they predict the type of information that will be measured and the value of the 
measurement. Given Zurek’s demonstration that, in quantum processes, information is 
physical and that there is no information without representation (Zurek, 1998 ) and that 
axiom 1 posits that the state of the quantum system is represented by the Hilbert state 
vector, we are compelled to conclude that the quantum system must contain a physical 
representation of its state vector. Crucially, this physical representation may be 
considered an internal model residing within the quantum system and this model, 
through the measurement predictions it contains, simulates the quantum system’s 
interactions with its environment. 
 
Recently Zurek’s research has focused on the fate of quantum information that has been 
copied into its environment. His major finding is that the information best able to 
survive the process of decoherence is also the information having the highest 
reproductive success in the environment, thereby causing it to become the most 
widespread. This principle, along with decoherence, is encapsulated by the theory of 
Quantum Darwinism.  
III. Quantum Darwinism as a Darwinian process 
Given these brief summaries of Darwinian processes and of Quantum Darwinism we are 
in a position to evaluate the extent to which Quantum Darwinism might be considered a 
Darwinian process. Clearly, in Zurek’s view, there is little question of the Darwinian 
nature of quantum processes or of its central importance; he sees Quantum Darwinism 
as conforming to the Darwinian paradigm and identifies it as the mechanism 
responsible for the emergence of classical reality from the quantum substrate: (Zurek, 
2004) 
 
The aim of this paper is to show that the emergence of the classical reality can 
be viewed as a result of the emergence of the preferred states from within the 
quantum substrate thorough the Darwinian paradigm, once the survival of the 
fittest quantum states and selective proliferation of the information about them 
are properly taken into account. 
 
The Darwinian paradigm, as defined within Universal Darwinism, encompasses details 
in addition to survival of the fittest and selective proliferation. The following evaluation 
will consist of a comparison of four characteristics of Darwinian processes (listed at the 
end of section 1) with the characteristics of quantum systems as described by Quantum 
Darwinism.  
 
1. The operation of a three step ‘copy with selective retention’ algorithm.  
 
Decoherence essentially describes a process by which information is copied or 
transferred from a quantum system to its environment. Much of the varied 
information contained in the state vector is copied but most has extremely short 
periods of survival. The fittest quantum states, or pointer states, are selected 
(Zurek, 1998 ). The selected quantum states are those capable of the greatest 
reproductive success (Zurek, 2004). Clearly Quantum Darwinism is formulated 
in a manner consistent with the three step algorithm of a Darwinian process. 
 
2. Operation as an adaptive system where the system, the effect of the 
environment on the system and the effect of the system on the 
environment are modeled internally and the system conforms to 
Friston’s free energy principle. The simulation of the system’s 
environmental interactions may be understood as computation. 
 
Axiom 1 of quantum theory tells us that all information concerning a quantum 
system is contained within the state vector making it an excellent candidate for 
an internal model. As there can be no information without representation this 
information must physically reside within the quantum system. Axiom 2 tells us 
that this state vector, and the information it contains, will evolve according to the 
Schrödinger equation: 
 
 
   
Where ψ x, t is the state vector and H  is the Hamiltonian operator. 
 
As the Hamiltonian operator encapsulates internal effects of the system, the 
effect of the system on the environment and the effects of the environment on the 
system this model of the quantum system meets the criteria of an internal model 
operating within an adaptive system. 
 
Further, we can consider Friston’s free energy principle to be satisfied by this 
adaptive system if we note that Zurek has shown the measurement predictions of 
quantum theory are implied by the first three axioms. As the predictions of 
quantum theory are amongst the most accurate in science we might conclude that 
the prediction error or free energy between the model and the system’s actual 
experiences is minimized.  
 
In Seth Lloyd’s (2007) treatment of quantum computation the interactions of 
quantum systems are interpreted as quantum computations. The result of the 
computation is the outcome of the interaction. In this sense the state vector 
precisely predicts the outcome and the prediction error is zero. We note in this 
context that the noiseless subsystems by which a quantum computation comes to 
its answer have been shown to be mathematically isomorphic with Zurek’s 
process of einselection (Blume-Kohout, 2008). Given the isomorphism between 
these two processes we are entitled to view quantum computation as a process 
where the ‘answer’ to a computation emerges via a Darwinian process. 

 
Given Lloyd’s interpretation that outcomes of quantum interactions are 
equivalent to simulations carried out by the quantum system and the fact that all 
physical interactions are quantum interactions we are led to the Church-Turing-
Deutsch principle which states that every finitely realizable physical system can 
be perfectly simulated by a quantum computation. 
 
A quantum system, as described by Zurek’s theory, meets the criteria of an 
adaptive system. The internal model formed by a representation of the state 
vector integrates information concerning the system, the effect of the 
environment on the system and the effect of the system on the environment. It 
also operates in accordance with Friston’s free energy principle for adaptive 
systems. The state vector, considered as an internal model, may be interpreted as 
performing computational simulations of the system’s environmental 
interactions. 
 
3. Maintenance of the internal model’s accuracy through Bayesian 
updating. 
 
 In order for an internal model of an adaptive system to reduce its prediction 
error it must accumulate knowledge through inference from environmental data.  
It has been demonstrated that there is a single method of conducting inference, 
and that is Bayes' Theorem, derived from the basic sum and product rule of 
Bayesian probability (Jaynes, 1985).  Bayes’ Theorem provides a method of 
calculating how confidence in a hypothesis or a model should be updated when 
new data becomes available: 
𝐏 𝐇 𝐃𝐗 = 𝐏(𝐇|𝐗) 𝐏(𝐃|𝐇𝐗)
𝐏(𝐃|𝐗)  
Where we are considering the Probability of Hypothesis (H) given prior data 
(X) and new data (D) 
 
In other words we should update our probability for the hypothesis or model 
being true by the extent to which the hypothesis enhances our ability to 
predict the new data. 
 
What was formerly axiom 4 of quantum theory reveals that every possible 
measurable state of the quantum system is predicted by the system state. 
The correct weighting that should be given to each possible outcome is given 
by Born’s rule. With the occurrence of a measurement of the system the state 
vector is updated. The probabilistic weightings for the various outcome 
hypotheses are reassigned in a Bayesian manner in accordance with axiom 3 
and the hypothesis associated with a repeat of the previous measurement 
result is assigned probability one and all other hypothesis are assigned 
probability zero. In other words our confidence as to the state of a quantum 
system immediately upon receiving pertinent data is strengthened to 
certainty. 
 
We can conclude that the internal model of quantum systems undergoes 
Bayesian updating through the system’s interactions with its environment. 
 
4. Production of adaptations which utilize the principle of maximum 
entropy to maintain the system’s low entropy state.  
 
Zurek’s program has shown that the interaction outcomes involving quantum 
systems can be predicted by a method named ‘predictability sieve’ (Zurek, 2003). 
This method essentially ranks all potential outcomes of the state vector according 
to their entropy production. Those outcomes that should be predicted (in 
accordance with former axiom 4) are those having the lowest entropy.  This 
ability of a system to find rare low entropy states which are also reproductively 
successful is a hallmark of Darwinian processes.  
 
As prevalence towards decoherence is strongly influenced by mass, relatively 
massive quantum systems such as those considered by atomic physics and 
chemistry are almost continuously decohered by their environments and their 
existence assumes what Zurek describes as a classical trajectory. This trajectory is 
characterized by stability, predictability and reproductive success, and should be 
understood as a near continuous ‘copy with selective retention’ process which 
unremittingly probes potential environmental interactions for low entropy 
solutions and instantiates those solutions once found. The system’s low entropy 
state, maintained by these interactions is balanced by an increase in 
environmental entropy (Zwolak, Quan, & Zurek, 2009).  
 
The evolution of these intricate quantum systems, which may be composed of 
many ‘fundamental’ particles, is governed by a Hamiltonian operator which 
models the complex interactions between the system and its environment. The 
principle of maximum entropy requires that the ability of these low entropy 
structures to have a well advertised and persistent presence within their classical 
environments be explained in terms of the system’s ability to impose constraints 
on the increase of entropy. These constraints might be considered adaptations 
and appear as scientific laws including those governing atomic orbitals and 
chemical bonds.  
 
Quantum systems evolve by continuously probing their environments to discover 
and instantiate rare low entropy outcomes at the expense of increasing 
environmental entropy. The variations adopted by the quantum system in its 
evolution may be considered adaptations and function to provide constraints 
against increasing entropy. Much of the subject matter of atomic physics and 
chemistry can be considered adaptations discovered and instantiated through a 
Darwinian process. 
 
In this perhaps radical view quantum systems emerge into classical reality and evolve 
there through a succession of information transfers to the environment. Each successive 
generation of offspring information contain variations. The variations which survive and 
are accumulated over generations are those that succeed in minimizing system entropy.   
In a suitable environment a quantum system may accumulate atomic and molecular 
adaptations and function as a relatively complex composite system. Adaptive systems 
are characterized by internal models which simulate and orchestrate their 
environmental interactions. Quantum theory tells us that quantum systems must 
include a physical implementation of an information processing model equivalent to the 
evolution of a state vector in Hilbert space.  While the nature of this model remains 
outside of experimental verification we are left in a similar situation to biology prior to 
1953 when many characteristics of life’s internal model were known and predictions 
could be made by invoking laws such as Mendelian inheritance but the manner of the 
model’s implementation in molecular DNA was not known.  
 
This evaluation indicates that quantum systems as described by Quantum Darwinism 
meet the listed criteria and may well be considered Darwinian processes as defined 
within Universal Darwinism. 
 
IV. Interpretational implications of Quantum Darwinism 
Zurek’s research program, encapsulated by the theory of Quantum Darwinism, offers a 
detailed explanation of the relationship between classical and quantum reality. In the 
author’s opinion it provides the greatest theoretical improvement in our understanding 
of this relationship since Bohr’s development of the correspondence principle in 1920. 
Einstein engaged Bohr in a series of debates claiming that quantum theory must be 
considered incomplete as long as it was unable to explain more clearly the nature of 
ontological reality, which for Einstein was classical reality. Philosopher C.P. Snow 
described these debates: ‘No more profound intellectual debate has ever been 
conducted’ (Isaacson, 2008). We might judge the importance of Zurek’s program by 
considering that the explanations it offers would likely have satisfied both Bohr and 
Einstein. 
 
The major interpretational issues for quantum theory raised by Quantum Darwinism 
result from its simplification and clarification of the subject through reducing the 
number of axioms required for its foundation. This radical reshaping of the foundations 
of quantum theory leaves most predictions intact but provides a much more thorough 
explanation of the processes involved. 
 
Axiom 4 of quantum theory has now been explained as due to the process of 
einselection. In the course of developing this explanation a number of further important 
mechanisms have been identified. One of these is ‘predictability sieve’ which clarifies the 
ability of quantum systems to probe their environment for low entropy states which 
have potential existence and to instantiate those states once found. 
 
 Axiom 5 of quantum theory has now been derived through the process of envariance, 
which produces Born’s rule.  Crucially, taken together, einselection and envariance 
demonstrate that the measurement predictions of quantum theory are implied by the 
remaining three axioms of the theory. Zurek’s principle of ‘no information without 
representation’ leads us to conclude that sufficient information for the predictions of 
quantum theory resides in some physical form within the quantum system. 
 
The emergence of classical reality from the quantum substrate, the topic often most fully 
informed by two seemingly arbitrary axioms, has been explained in detail. 
 
Hopefully this treatment will finally lay to rest the interpretational confusion around the 
role of a human observer in quantum measurements that has been prevalent in many 
treatments and taken to anthropomorphic extremes by some such as Wigner (1970). 
Zurek’s work makes it clear that decoherence takes place whenever there is an 
information transfer to the environment (Zurek, 2009). No human observer need be in 
attendance. 
 
The word measurement currently contains an anthropomorphic component but it is also 
much more nimble in usage than are many of the alternatives such as ‘monitoring by the 
environment’. The many variants or affixes of the root ‘measure’ such as measurement, 
measurable, measuring etc. make the word attractive for use in explanations. A possible 
resolution might be to create an additional scientific definition of measurement based 
on decoherence and devoid of references to a human observer. 
 
Conclusion 
Given the evaluation that Quantum Darwinism is a theory utilizing a Darwinian process 
and thus a component of Universal Darwinism we find Universal Darwinism extended 
beyond theories in biology and the social sciences to contain explanatory theories for 
particle physics, atomic physics and chemistry. Universal Darwinism may thus be seen 
as a paradigm offering a single comprehensive explanation of much of scientific reality. 
 
David Deutsch’s ground breaking work The Fabric of Reality (Deutsch, 1997) predicted 
that science would soon produce ‘a theory of all subjects: a Theory of Everything’. This 
theory would provide a single paradigm explaining scientific subject matter across all 
subjects. He ventured to provide details concerning four explanatory strands which the 
theory might integrate: 
1) Quantum Physics 
2) Epistemology 
3) The theory of computation 
4) The theory of Darwinian evolution 
 
I suggest that this discussion has shown the 1st and 4th of these strands to be integrated 
within the theory of Universal Darwinism.  
 
Epistemology referred to by Deutsch as the 2nd strand is the philosophy of science. 
Evolutionary epistemology, a branch of philosophy within the philosophy of science, 
contains a number of well-established theories that ascribe the evolution of science to 
the operation of Darwinian processes (D. Campbell 1965; J. Campbell, 2009; Popper, 
1972) and thus Deutsch’s 2nd strand is integrated within Universal Darwinism. 
 
Deutsch has argued that computability is a property bestowed by the natural world not 
by logic or mathematics, and that those functions that are computable are those for 
which nature has designed the appropriate computational machinery. The most basic 
computational machinery so far found in nature is that allowing quantum computation. 
This paper makes arguments that quantum computation may be viewed as the 
simulations of an adaptive system and that the ‘answers’ to a quantum computation 
emerge through a Darwinian process. These are arguments that Deutsch’s 3rd strand is 
integrated within Universal Darwinism. 
 
As all physical interactions are quantum interactions we might expect quantum 
computations to be utilized within other adaptive systems. Some evidence is 
accumulating in support of this notion. It has been shown that photosynthesis may 
utilize quantum computations to calculate the most efficient chemical pathways for the 
conversion of energy contained within a specific photon (Fleming et al., 2007). 
 
The theory of Universal Darwinism, as it integrates Deutsch’s four strands within a 
single explanatory paradigm, may serve as a candidate for the ‘Theory of Everything’ as 
anticipated by Deutsch. 
 
References 
Blackmore, S. (1995). The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Blume-Kohout, R. a. (2008). Characterizing the Structure of Preserved Infromation in 
Quantum Processes. Physical Review Letters, 100 (3), Art. No. 030501 . 
Brenner, S. (1999). Theoretical biology in the third millennium. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci. December 29; 354(1392) , 1963–1965. 
Campbell, D. (1965). Variation and selective retention in socio-cultural evolution. In R. 
B. G.I. Herbert, Social change in developing areas: A reinterpretation of evolutionary 
theory (pp. 19-49). Cambridge, Mass. 
Campbell, J. (2009). Bayesian Methods and Universal Darwinism. Bayesian Methods 
and Maximum Entropy in Science and Technology (In Press).  
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Touchstone Publishing. 
Deutsch, D. (1985). Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the universal 
quantum computer. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 400 , 97-117. 
Deutsch, D. (1997). The Fabric of Reality. London: The Penguin Press. 
Fleming, G. R., Blankenship, R. E., Engel, G. S., Calhoun, T. R., Read, E. L., Ahn, T.-K., 
et al. (2007). Evidence for wavelike energy transfer through quantum coherence in 
photosynthetic systems. Nature: Zoology and wildlife conservation . 
Friston, K. (2007). Free Energy and the Brain. Synthese , 159 , 417-458. 
Green, B. (1999). The Elegant Universe. New York: W.W. Norton & Company Inc. 
Isaacson, W. (2008). Einstein: His Life and Universe. Simon and Schuster. 
Jaynes, E. (1985). Bayesian Methods: General Background. In E. J.H. Justice, 
Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Applied Statistics (Proceedings Volume) 
(pp. 1-25). Cambridge University Press. 
Lloyd, S. (2007). Computing the Universe. Vintage; Reprint edition. 
Markopoulou, F., & Smolin, L. (2004). Quantum Theory from Quantum Gravity . 
Phys.Rev. D70 (2004) 124029 . 
Plotkin, H. C. (1993). Darwin Machines. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard 
University Press. 
Popper, K. (1972). Objective Knowledge. Claredon Press. 
Smolin, L. (2001). Three Roads to Quantum Gravity. New Youk: Basic Books. 
Wigner, E. (1970). Symmetries and Reflections: Scientific Essays. MIT Press. 
Zurek, W. H. (1998 ). Decoherence, Einselection and the Existential Interpretation (the 
Rough Guide). Philosophical Transactions: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering 
Sciences , 1793-1821. 
Zurek, W. H. (2003). Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the 
classical. Review of Modern Physics, 75, 715 . 
Zurek, W. H. (2009). Quantum Darwinism. Nature Physics, vol. 5 , 181-188. 
Zurek, W. H. (2004). Quantum Darwinism and Envariance. In P. C. J. D. Barrow, 
Science and Ultimate Reality: From Quantum to Cosmos. Cambridge University Press. 
Zwolak, M., Quan, H. T., & Zurek, W. H. (2009). Quantum Darwinism in non-ideal 
environments. Preprint; arXiv:0911.4307 . 
 
 