Towards a Bayesian mechanics of metacognitive particles: A
commentary on “Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange
things” by Friston, Da Costa, Sakthivadivel, Heins, Pavliotis,
Ramstead, and Parr
Lancelot Da Costa1,2,3, Lars Sandved-Smith4,∗
1Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London
2Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London
3VERSES AI Research Lab
4Monash Centre for Consciousness and Contemplative Studies
Following the typology of particles introduced in the target article [1], we introduce a further distinction
between cognitive and metacognitive particles. Metacognitive particles are called as such because they have
beliefs about (some of) their own beliefs.
Figure 1:Example of a metacognitive strange particle.This particle is such that internal states (at the
lower level, i.e.µ2) are hidden from internal states (at the higher level, i.e.µ1). In other words, higher level
internal states must infer the lower level internal states via the sensory states, leading to the metacognitive
belief qm
⃗ µ1
.
The target article argues that strange particles may be most apt for describing sentient behaviour [1]. So let’s
consider a strange particle whose internal state-space can be decomposed into two sets of statesµ ≜ (µ1, µ2),
such that the second set of states is hidden from the first via the Markov blanket. That is,µ1 may influence
µ2 directly, butµ2 may only influenceµ1 via the Markov blanket. To visualize this, this is the flow governing
∗Correspondence: lars.sandvedsmith@gmail.com
1
arXiv:2403.06981v1  [nlin.AO]  24 Nov 2023
a metacognitive particle:
f(η, s, a, µ) =


fη(η, s, a)
fs(η, s, a)
fa(s, a, µ)
fµ1 (s, µ1)
fµ2 (s, µ)


(1)
The form of the coupling is summarised in Figure 1. We will callµ1 the higher-level internal states andµ2
the lower-level internal states in virtue of the fact thatµ1 will be seen as encoding beliefs at a higher level,
i.e. some sort of metacognition.
Analogously to the discussion on strange particles [1, eq. 29], the form of the coupling (1), means that
sensory states are a Markov blanket between higher- and lower-level internal states:
(⃗ µ1 ⊥ ⃗ η,⃗ a, ⃗ µ2) | ⃗ s (2)
In particular, the lower internal states can only be inferred vicariously by the higher internal states via the
sensory states. So we can definemetacognitive beliefs encoded by the higher-level internal statesqm
⃗ µ1
(⃗ η,⃗ a, ⃗ µ2),
where1
qm
⃗µ1 (⃗ η,⃗ a, ⃗ µ2) ≜ p(⃗ η,⃗ a, ⃗ µ2 | ⃗ s)
⃗µ1 ≜ arg max
⃗ µ1
p(⃗ µ1 | ⃗ s) (3)
This sort of beliefs encoded by the higher internal state about the lower internal state is interesting because it
implies that the higher internal states encode beliefs about beliefs, licensing the metacognitive terminology.
Indeed, recall that a particle holds beliefsq⃗ µ(⃗ η) about the external world encoded by the internal states,
where by definition [1],
q⃗µ(⃗ η) =p(⃗ η| ⃗ s,⃗ a)
⃗µ ≜ arg max
⃗ µ
p(⃗ µ| ⃗ s,⃗ a) (4)
(See [2] for an explicit construction). It then follows that metacognitive beliefs encode information about
the parameters of beliefs about the world, evincing a form ofparametric depth[3]. Perhaps the easiest way
to see this is when the particular beliefs factorise according to a mean-field approximation:
q⃗ µ(⃗ η) =q⃗ µ1 (⃗ η)q⃗ µ2 (⃗ η) (5)
Then the (marginal) metacognitive beliefqm
⃗ µ1
(⃗ µ2) is a belief about the beliefq⃗ µ2 (⃗ η). The upshot is that once
we have beliefs about some of our own internal states, we are bound to exhibit a form of metacognition that
influences behaviour. For example, a person who is surprised by their sudden inability to taste coffee (a
possible sign of pancreatic cancer) might introspect and act accordingly [4]. In summary:
Definition 1 (Cognitive and metacognitive particles). A metacognitive particle is a particle which holds
metacognitive beliefs, i.e. beliefs about beliefs, e.g. as in (3). Any non-metacognitive particle, on the other
hand, is acognitive particle, given that it holds beliefs about the world.
Note also that we could study higher levels of metacognition, by considering particles with a unidirected
chain of internal statesµ1 → µ2 → . . .→ µn, cf. Figure 1. In this case the internal states at the highest
level, i.e. µ1, may encode beliefs about beliefs about beliefs etc (n times).
In conclusion, we believe that the typology of particles laid down in the target article [1] is promising, not
least for a physics of cognition that builds upon and refines the free energy principle [5]. As a result, we
are starting to be able to derive formal descriptions of cognition that are increasingly specific to entities
possessing higher forms of cognition, such as, we hope, the human being.
1These are well defined for a large class of strange particles in virtue of conditions analogous to that discussed in [1, p. 24].
2
Funding statement
L.D. is supported by the Fonds National de la Recherche, Luxembourg (Project code: 13568875). This
publication is based on work partially supported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Mathematics
of Random Systems: Analysis, Modelling and Simulation, United Kingdom (EP/S023925/1). L.S.S. is
supported by the Three Springs Foundation.
References
[1] Karl Friston, Lancelot Da Costa, Dalton A. R. Sakthivadivel, Conor Heins, Grigorios A. Pavliotis,
Maxwell Ramstead, and Thomas Parr. Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange things. Physics
of Life Reviews, August 2023.
[2] Lancelot Da Costa, Karl Friston, Conor Heins, and Grigorios A. Pavliotis. Bayesian mechanics for sta-
tionary processes.Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
477(2256):20210518, December 2021.
[3] Lars Sandved-Smith, Casper Hesp, Jérémie Mattout, Karl Friston, Antoine Lutz, and Maxwell J D Ram-
stead. Towards a computational phenomenology of mental action: Modelling meta-awareness and atten-
tional control with deep parametric active inference.Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021(1):niab018,
January 2021.
[4] Jakob Hohwy.The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press, November 2013.
[5] Karl Friston, Lancelot Da Costa, Noor Sajid, Conor Heins, Kai Ueltzhöffer, Grigorios A. Pavliotis, and
Thomas Parr. The free energy principle made simpler but not too simple.Physics Reports, 1024:1–29,
June 2023.
3