Semantic Enrichment of Mobile Phone Data
Records Using Background Knowledge
Zolzaya Dashdorj1,2,3,4, Stanislav Sobolevsky2, Luciano Seraﬁni3,
Fabrizio Antonelli4, and Carlo Ratti2
1University of Trento, Italy Via Sommarive, 9 Povo, TN, Italy
dashdorj@disi.unitn.it
2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT 77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA, USA
stanly,ratti@mit.edu
3Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18 Povo, TN, Italy
serafini@fbk.eu
4SKIL LAB – Telecom Italia, Italy Via Sommarive 18 Povo, TN, Italy
fabrizio.antonelli@telecomitalia.it
Abstract
Every day, billions of mobile network events (commonly deﬁned as Call De-
tailed Records, or CDRs) are generated by cellular phone operator companies.
Latent in this data are inspiring insights about human actions and behaviors, the
discovery of which is important because context-aware applications and services
hold the key to user-driven, intelligent services, which can enhance our everyday
lives. This potential has motivated preliminary research activities in a variety of
domains such as social and economic development, urban planning, and health
prevention. The major challenge in this area is that interpreting such a big stream
of data requires a deep understanding of mobile network events’ context through
available background knowledge. Two of the most important factors in the events’
context are location and time. This article addresses the issues in context awareness
given heterogeneous and uncertain data of mobile network events missing reliable
information on the context of this activity. The contribution of this research is a
model from a combination of logical and statistical reasoning standpoints for en-
abling human activity inference in qualitative terms from open geographical data
1
arXiv:1504.05895v1  [cs.AI]  22 Apr 2015
that aimed at improving the quality of human behaviors recognition tasks from
CDRs. We use open geographical data, Openstreetmap (OSM), as a proxy for
predicting the content of human activity in the area. The user study performed
in Trento city, Italy shows that predicted human activities (high level) from OSM
match the survey data with around 93% overall accuracy, with fuzzy temporal
constraints. The extensive analysis of the model validation for predicting a more
speciﬁc—economical—type of human activity performed in Barcelona city, Spain,
by employing credit card transaction data. This data gives us ground-truth infor-
mation on what types of economic activity are occurring. The analysis identiﬁes
that appropriately normalized data on points of interest (POI) is a good proxy for
predicting human economical activities, with 84% accuracy on average. So the
model is proven to be efﬁcient for predicting the context of human activity, when
its total level could be efﬁciently observed from cell phone data records, missing
contextual information however.
Index terms— mobile phone data records, big geo-spatial data, human activ-
ity recognition, human mobility, context aware computing, qualitative methods,
human behavior, semantics, ontology, machine learning, knowledge management,
linked open data
1 Introduction
Increasingly, massive amounts of data are being generated, stored, and disseminated as
a result of human activity. For instance, whenever a mobile phone call, monetary trans-
action, or social media post is made, geo-located data is automatically generated by mo-
bile network provider, bank, or social network provider (e.g., Facebook or Twitter) and
attached to the data record generated by the activity. An extensive body of works lever-
age for studying human dynamics through cell phone data [1, 25, 27, 48, 60], social
media posts [28, 41], bank card transactions [61, 62] and vehicle GPS traces [32, 56].
Over the last few years, the use of mobile phones as sensors of human behavior has rad-
ically increased. Storage and analysis of information from mobile phones can provide
useful insights into how people move and behave. From them, it is possible to infer
with a certain level of accuracy, the activities humans are performing at every moment
they are connected to the mobile network. Indeed, experiments in large-scale social dy-
namics have been conducted in the areas of public safety and emergency management
[4, 36, 43], health and disease management [21, 66], social and economic development
[1, 18, 22], transport/infrastructure [5, 32], urban planning [3, 9, 24, 27, 33, 38, 44] and
international development, poverty [59] and more [7]. A large fraction of mobile phone
data has been shown to be extremely useful for humanitarian and development appli-
cations (Robert Kirkpatrik UN 2013). This geo—and—time information have explicit
2
or implicit geographic location.
A commonly used source of mobile phone data for which studies is comprised of
aggregated and anonymized Call Detailed Records (CDRs), provide meta data about
phone activity. This allows us to identify the time, the location, the duration, and possi-
bly of the movements of mobile phones owners. Because the mobile network operator
knows the locations of their cell towers, it is possible to use CDRs to approximate the
location of users. The spacing of cell towers, and thus the accuracy in determining
caller’s locations, varies according to expected trafﬁc and terrain. Cell towers are typ-
ically spaced 2-3 km apart in rural areas and 400-800 m apart in densely populated
areas. Commonly the CDRs are available as anonymous, often incomplete or aggre-
gated because of privacy issues. Accessing personal or private data is a very sensitive
and critical topic, which arises claims to be aware of privacy issues before the research
outcomes are shared. The main research area of this article is the one, which investi-
gates inferring (collective) human behavior starting from such CDR.
Current research [2, 8, 23, 45] notes that with a pure CDR, it is possible to identify
human behaviors, but results suffer from the heterogeneity, uncertainty and complexity
of raw datasets and that the lack of qualitative content is included in the data itself that
may be used to help to infer human behaviors. In spite of the bad quality of data, some
researchers are able to identify a certain level of human behaviors with the help of
features that can be indirectly obtained from the raw CDR. These features are observed
information about real-world cases. For example, a user’s home location is identiﬁed
by the frequent stay (location) of the user between midnight to early morning [8]. These
features are mostly speciﬁed by domain experts. Most of the behavioral datasets, such
as CDR or GPS traces, are relatively large raw datasets where user location is not
perfect for tracking the dataset. Such data are incomplete, typically lacking in content
and the measurement accuracy of the data is low and coarse grained. While this data
provides extensive information regarding when and where people go, it typically does
not allow understanding of which activity is performed at that location.
When the context information of raw data is not directly available in the data, some
useful characteristic values for human behaviors can still be discovered by analyzing
the activity patterns of mobile network communication [10, 26, 64]. For example,
anomalous events can be observed by the change of daily communication activity pat-
terns [10]. Using some semantics about ongoing events (e.g., the location and the time
of an event), researchers [2, 8, 8, 23, 31] are able to discover some relationships be-
tween human behaviors (i.e., communication and mobility patterns), and emergency
(e.g., earthquake, blackout) or non emergency events (e.g., concert, festival). However,
the results are limited to only speciﬁc events and the correlations between the events
and human behaviors. For instance, the quantitative analysis of behavioral changes in
3
presence of extreme emergency events show radical increase of call frequency right
after the event occurs, with long term impacts [2].
Human behavior is inﬂuenced by many external factors, such as weather condition,
urban structure, social event. Knowing the context, where a person is important to
guess what he/she is doing. For instance, if a person is in or close to a restaurant and
makes a phone call around 1:00 pm., or 8:00 pm., then the person is probably look-
ing for eating some food, or (s)he works at the restaurant. In this article, we propose
to formalize the context as a pair ⟨l,t⟩, where l is a location (= geographical area)
and t is a time interval. A context can be associated with various information. For
instance, weather, events, surrounding geo-objects, and more. For every record in a
CDR dataset, it is possible to determine to a certain level of approximation the con-
text associated to such a record. Some research studies [24, 30, 45, 46, 46, 65] have
been performed to understand the correlations of human behaviors to environmental
factors, using some additional contextual information about weather, social events and
geographical information systems. This focuses on the inference of a certain level of
human activities in a certain condition. For instance, human behavior changes during
periods of uncomfortable weather condition [65].
Among the literature of raw CDR analysis, researchers mostly employ data-mining
and machine learning algorithms 1 [17, 50] in the analysis. Supervised learning algo-
rithms (e.g., Multiclass SVM, Logistic Regression, Multilayer Perceptron, Decision
Tree, KNN) can achieve reasonable accuracy on the CDR analysis but they require
qualitative and quantitative properties in data and ground truth information in order to
perform behavior classiﬁcation well. The researchers claimed to acquire a sufﬁcient
amount of labeled training data. For their studies, but obtaining ground-truth infor-
mation (e.g., user diaries and surveys) for training data remains a very expensive and
almost unmanageable task, especially when one considers the large amounts of CDR
data that need to be annotated and the diversity in the contexts of mobile phone events
that makes the annotation more difﬁcult.
The result of CDR analysis usually provides quantitative evidence that are pre-
sented in visual analytic tools (e.g. graphs and tendencies), and requires a qualitative
description for the human behavior interpretation. Less interest has been dedicated to
the development of methods that are capable of producing a qualitative/semantic level
description of human behavior. This thesis will concentrate on providing qualitative
descriptions of human behavior. For representing human behavior, we propose to use
semantic descriptions based on an ontology. More in details, a semantic description of
human behaviors is a representation of the behaviors of a single person, the behaviors
of a group of people or the events that happen in the human society, in terms of con-
1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supervised learning
4
cepts and relations of an ontology. An example of a semantic description of human
behaviors is in the fact that “a person is performing some speciﬁc actions” (e.g. work-
ing, shopping and hiking), or the fact that “certain events are happening in a certain
area” (e.g. a car accident and a train suddenly stopping in the middle of nowhere).
Growing information in a variety of Web 2.0 and social platforms opens opportuni-
ties for collecting and using information about the context associated to mobile phone
data records. These sources include a wide and diverse set of data that can be useful to
characterize a user’s context: environmental data; statistic description of the territory;
public and private, emergency and non-emergency events; statistical data about de-
mography, ethnography, energy or water consumption; and more. These kinds of data
should be employed as contextual information if we are to gain a better understanding
of a user’s context, as they allow a more representative and semantically expressive
characterization of the relationships between human behavior and different contextual
factors.
This article seeks understanding human behavior based on contextual information
obtained (also) by leveraging available Web 2.0 data sources, representing them in both
a conceptual and computational model, such as the correlations between contexts and
human behaviors, and prediction of human activities of a group of people will perform
in a given context, and the most probable action that a group of people are doing in
a context. The contextual information can be inaccurate, unavailable, uncertain and
noisy. In our research, we need to pre-estimate if the information is useful enough
by measuring the validity, accuracy, and suitability of the data. Such contextual data
needs to be effectively integrated, coping with the problems caused by uncertainty and
heterogeneity of data.
We identiﬁed that points of interest (POIs) are good proxies for predicting the con-
tent of human activities in the context in which mobile network events occur. Our pro-
posed model is named High Level Representation of Behavior Model (HRBModel),
and correlates POIs and the time of the day with typical user activities. The model in-
tegrates an ontology for POIs and times/days with an ontology for human activities and
statistical information about the correlations between the two. Given a set of POIs and
a time of the day (which can both be inferred from the context), the model generates a
set of human activities associated with a likelihood measure.
We validated the accuracy of the model using two different qualitative geo-located
data-sources, providing us ground-truth information on what type of human activities
were performed in a given location: 1) user feedback collected in Trento, Italy and,
2) bank card transaction data generated in Barcelona, Spain. Our extended evaluation
of the model includes a validation of the impact of heterogeneity and uncertainty of
open geographical data for recognizing human activities. This validation is performed
5
on city scale and takes different land-use types into account in order to understand the
level of accuracy of human activity prediction from the geographical data or vice versa
from bank card transaction data.
The innovative aspect of the research is the development and usage of ontologies
for analysis of raw CDR data, combined in a mixed model with data mining numerical
methods. Our method improves the quality of human activity recognition tasks given
noisy, lossy, and uncertain data, and allows to infer, with a certain level of accuracy, the
different level (of hierarchy) of activities humans are performing at a speciﬁc location
and time. Accordingly, the model can deal with a wide range of contextual features
about objects of a territory by extracting concepts and inter-concept relations.
Another innovative aspect is that the HRBModel is a general model that can be used
to provide semantic interpretation of any type of geo-located and time-dependent data,
other than CDR, such as data provided by social platforms like Foursquare, or Twitter,
GPS, and Credit Card data. Potential applications of this research are a context aware
application systems, and “smart cities” applications that provide decision support for
stakeholders in areas such as urban, transport planning, tourism and event analysis,
emergency response, health improvement, community understanding, economic indi-
cators and others [6, 19, 35].
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 brieﬂy summarizes
relevant literature. In the following section, we introduce the data-sources we used
for contextual information. The core methodology of the HRBModel to extract high
level human activities from geographical information is explained in Section 4. The
experimental results and evaluation of the model are presented in Section 5. In Section
6, we discuss the usage of the model and describe possible developments (extensions).
Finally, in Section 7, we draw some conclusions.
2 Related Works
Great opportunity and impact on human activity recognition is brought by mobile
phone data. Through data mining and machine learning techniques, human activity
data becomes available for further analysis.
Researchers in the areas of behavioral and social sciences are interested in examin-
ing CDR to characterize and understand real-life phenomena, such as individual traits,
human mobility [2, 8, 11, 63], communication and interaction pattern[8, 39, 49]. Can-
dia et al [10] proposes an approach to understand dynamics of the individual calling
activities, which could carry implications on social networks. The author analyzed call-
ing activities of different group of users; (some people rarely use mobile phone, others
use often). The cumulative distribution of consecutive calls made by each user is mea-
6
sured within each group and the result explains that the subsequent time of consecutive
calls is useful to discover some characteristic values for the behaviors. For example,
peaks occur near noon and late evening. The fraction of active traveling population
and average distance of travel are almost stable during the day. This approach can be
applied for detecting anomalous events. In [8], the authors analyze the mobility traces
of groups of users with the objective of extracting standard mobility patterns for people
during special events. In particular, this work presents an analysis of anonymized traces
from the Boston metropolitan area during a number of selected events that happened
in the city. They ﬁnally proved that people who live close to an event are preferentially
interested in events organized in the proximity of their residence.
Some researchers used semantic tags for geographic location from social networks
or user diaries to identify a semantic meaning of places [34, 54, 57, 67, 68] captured in
user CDRs or GPS trajectories. Supervised learning algorithms (e.g. binary SVM and
hidden markov models) are employed for this identiﬁcation.
People perform different activities even when they stay in the same location at the
same time, with respect to the wide difference of situations caused by various factors
like natural, technological or societal disasters, from hurricanes to violent conﬂicts.
This requires the consideration of potential inﬂuencing context factors on a common
space-time basis that enables the associations of those different datasets. Indeed, some
researchers [2, 8, 23, 45] use an additional information about context factors in or-
der to study the relationship between human behaviors and context factors like social
events, geographical location, weather condition, etc. This is always as successful as
the quality of the context factors.
In fact, some researchers validated the use of spatial and temporal contextual fea-
tures for understanding the relationship between human behaviors and environmental
factors. For instance, Sagl and Resch et al. [51] found that many factors inﬂuence
the collective human behavior and weather conditions and geographic information are
certainly two of these factors. Therefore, associating environmental and social fac-
tors to mobile phone data is extremely useful for analyzing the dependency of human
behaviors from the external factors. These studies focus on the inference of a cer-
tain level of human activities under certain conditions like human behavior changes in
uncomfortable weather conditions [30, 46, 46, 65], human mobility of different com-
munities [10, 45], human mobility during an event [2, 8, 42], or communication activity
patterns in different land-use types [24, 44, 45, 60]. In this work, geographical informa-
tion in particular points of interest (POIs) are collected using pYsearch (Python APIs
for Y! search services) from a map. They annotated POIs with four type of activities;
eating, recreational, shopping and entertainment. The authors analyzed human activ-
ity patterns (i.e., sequence of area proﬁles visited by users) correlating to geographical
7
proﬁles. Bayesian method is used to classify the areas into crisp distribution map of
activities, which enables the activity pattern extraction of the users. The results shows
that the users who share the same work proﬁle follow the similar daily activity patterns.
But not only these area proﬁles can explain the mobility of these users and the enlarge-
ment of activity or event taxonomy in those areas can enable the classiﬁcaions of these
activity patterns. Due to the limitation of heterogeneity of activities considered in this
research, the results in measurement lacks of certainty.
The authors of [8] ﬁnd that residents are more attracted to events that are organized
close to the home location of the residents. F. Girardin et al. [24] analyzed aggregate
mobile phone data records in New York City to explore the capacity to quantify the
evolution of the attractiveness of urban space and the impact of a public event on the
distribution of visitors and on the evolution of the attractiveness of the points of in-
terest in proximity. In [52], the authors introduced an approach to provide additional
insights in some interactions between people and weather. Weather can be seen as a
higher-level phenomenon, a conglomerate that comprises several meteorological vari-
ables including air temperature, rainfall, air pressure, relative humidity, solar radiation,
wind direction and speed, etc. The approach has been signiﬁcantly extended to a more
advanced context-aware analysis in [53].
3 Data gathering
In this study, we model one contextual location dataset of 4.6 million POIs in Trento,
Italy, 2.6 million POIs from OSM in Barcelona, Spain against two 130K POSs from
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBV A), and CDRs from GSM 900 and GSM 1800
(Telecom Italia). Here, we describe the structure of mobile network events and to
investigate how mobile network data can be combined with the available contextual
information for supporting human recognition task. We show that location and time are
the key factors to integrate mobile phone data records with the contextual information
coming from the other sources about environments and events.
3.1 Mobile phone data records
There are many possible types of CDRs generated by operator companies. In the fol-
lowings we describe the ones we are using to use in this article. The initial experiments
of this thesis have been done on a CDR dataset (completely anonymized) provided by
Telecom Italia with the following structure:
source cell and target cell:the identiﬁers of the cell from which the call is issued and
the receiver’s cell, respectively. They are composed of a Location Area Code
8
and additional parameters, such as the operator, etc. Cell ID needs to be resolved
into a physical geographical area
date and timeThe date and the time of the day in which the call is issued
duration The duration of the call
To combine mobile phone data records with contextual information, location and
time associated to each single call are key. CDR are not directly geo-referenced but
they are labelled with the cell. From the cell, and the geographical cell distribution
we can reconstruct with a certain level of accuracy and estimation of the geographical
location of the user when he or she generated a particular mobile event.
As an example, here we describe the structure of cell coverage map that gener-
ated by Telecom Italia. We use aggregate GSM 900 and 1800 data that was provided
by Telecom Italia. The cell coverage map of the mobile network is captured across
Trento containing completely anonymized cell (antennas). Cell identiﬁcation is used
for identiﬁcation of some portion of a physical geographical area featured within a set
of devices (antennas) that support the mobile communication (e.g. calls, sms and in-
ternet). The size of coverage areas can vary depending on the estimation of call trafﬁc
from/to this area. Usually the size of the coverage areas are inversely proportional to
the density of the population inhabiting the area. However there is an upper-bound of
the coverage area size due to antennas physical limits to 35 km. The cell partition is
not ﬁxed and can vary depending on the demand of network during speciﬁc periods.
For instance to support an increased request of communications, additional cells can be
dynamically activated in order to increase the capability of the entire network. Partial
knowledge of mapping between cell ID’s and coverage areas, irregularity of the size
of the cell, and dynamically of the cell conﬁguration add complexity and uncertainty
on the identiﬁcation of the physical location from where a call is issued. Nowadays,
cell coverage maps are restricted to be accessed due to privacy issues. Yet, some open
sources for cell coverage maps are available on the web sites, such as Open Cell-ID 2
and Open Signal Maps3
3.2 Credit card data
Credit card data is raw data semantically enriched with some semantic information
which describes the type of transaction that will be used in our analysis in order to
evaluate the proposed approach. The descriptions of which are provided for research
purposes by one of the largest Spanish banks, BBV A. The raw dataset is protected by
2http://www.opencellid.org
3http://opensignal.com
9
the appropriate non-disclosure agreement and is not publicly available. The data was
completely anonymized on the bank’s side, preventing access to any personal informa-
tion of the customers in accordance with all applicable privacy protection regulations.
Each transaction is characterized with its value, a timestamp, and additionally the retail
location, where it was performed at the Points of Sale (POS) terminals. Each POS is
categorized into one of the 76 business activity types, such as groceries, fashion, bars,
restaurants, sport shops, etc.
3.3 Contextual data
Openstreetmap (OSM) is an open and free map of the world enriched with a large num-
ber of geo-referenced objects upon an open content license. The database of OSM is
frequently updated and is rapidly growing. It has a free tagging system based on a well
documented taxonomy, which classiﬁes objects in categories, such as roads, buildings,
etc. OSM adopts a topological data structure based on the three core elements:
Nodes: points with a geographic coordinate (i.e., a pair of latitude and longitude). A
node mostly describes a POI. For example, shops, restaurants, etc.
Ways: ordered lists of nodes in a poly-line or a polygon. These elements are used for
representing linear features or areas, such as streets and forests.
Relations: groups of nodes and ways that represent the relations among existing nodes
and ways, such as roads with several exiting ways.
Each of aforementioned three element types is described with geographic coordi-
nates. Nodes are mainly used to represent POIs, but they can also be used as part of
ways to represent linear features. So a POI can be described in a node or in nodes,
and part of a way, for instance, a railway level crossing. The metadata of OSM is
provided in the form of tags (i.e., a textual description described as a pair of key and
value) to describe each element. Nodes, ways, and relations are tagged, and that the
tag represent some information about the node, for instance if it is a station, a shop, a
road, a crossing, etc. A list of common tags used (but not all) is captured in the Map
Features page4. The tags for nodes, ways, and relations are represented as a set of
pairs of ⟨key,value⟩. For example, a university is tagged as that the key is amenity,
the value is university, and the highway route is tagged as that the key is route, the
value is highway. The OSM tags for one node corresponding to a supermarket in XML
representation are shown below::
4http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Map Features
10
<node id="618033185" version="3" uid="330007"
user="pikappa79"
timestamp="2011-05-26T16:02:14Z"
changeset="8254868"
lat="46.0946011" lon="11.1162507">
<tag k="addr:postcode" v="38121"/>
<tag k="shop" v="supermarket"/>
<tag k="addr:country" v="IT"/>
<tag k="name" v="Supermercato PAM"/>
<tag k="addr:housename" v="Bren Center"/>
<tag k="addr:street"
v="Via Giovanni Battista Trener"/>
<tag k="addr:city" v="Trento"/>
</node>
The way we intend to use OSM in this article is by collecting the objects which are
in the cell area. These objects can provide insights on the type of action a person while
he is located in a cell area. For instance, if a person is in or close to a restaurant and
makes a phone call around 1:00 pm., or 8:00 pm., then the person is probably looking
for eating some food. Alternatively or complementary, we could use Google Map or
Yahoo Map or regional cadastral map database for collecting the POIs within the each
cell area. A relevant technique for POIs extraction in a given region from geographical
information system is described in [15, 45].
Table 1 introduces a brief description of ontology we used to generate useful in-
formation from the aforementioned heterogeneous data sources. For the integration
between these qualitative data-sources we designed an ontology for each domains used
in this PhD research work: 1) POI, 2) Action, 3) Time. This ontology is based on
surveys, crowdsourcing, and domain experts, or the formally deﬁned classiﬁcations for
instance, business career classiﬁcation by YellowPages or sport classiﬁcation by the
Olympic Game Committee, etc.
4 High-level representation of behavior model
This section introduces a prediction model, called High Level Representation of Be-
havior Model (HRBModel) [15]. This model generates a set of human activities with
a likelihood from the set of POIs. The structure of the model is visualized in Figure
1(a). The HRBModel consists of two core components: the Human Behavior Ontology
(HBOnto) and the Stochastic Behavior Model (SBM). The HBOnto is an ontology that
11
Table 1: Input and Output cardinalities
Ontology Input Input Output Output
Cardinality Cardinality
OSMonto OSM 1822 POIs 517
ActOnto Survey, Crowdsourcing 420 actions 217
YellowPages
TimeOnto Survey, experts 72 fuzzy times 27
days
HBOnto OSMonto, ActOnto 52 classiﬁers actions parent-10
TimeOnto all-217
provides a classiﬁcation of POIs, human actions, and periods of the day, and it formal-
izes the relations between these three sets of elements. For example, at the university,
people are studying in the morning and afternoon. The SBM provides a likelihood
measure to each of the actions that has been selected by the ontology, on the basis of
the frequency of POIs and on a fuzzy model of the actions depending on the time of
the day. It allows us to predict the possible top- k activities associated with a likeli-
hood, that could be performed in each context of a given region. For example, having
a breakfast activity is the most probable activity at residential types of area in the early
morning.
In the remainder of the chapter, we describe in details the two components of the
HRBModel: HBOnto in Section 4.1 and SBO in Section 4.3. In Section 4.4, we show
the application of the HRBModel.
4.1 Human behavior ontology (HBOnto)
The Human Behavior Ontology (HBOnto) provides a set of possible activities for a
given POI type or in the time of day, i.e., it does a priori activity selection on the
basis of POIs and time of the day. For instance, it excludes “sleeping” if the time of
the day is 1:00 pm. and it excludes “hiking” if you are in the city center. It includes
activities only if there are POIs that activates them. For example, an area containing
a swimming pool activities swimming activity. The HBOnto 5 is composed of three
ontologies (see Figure 1(b)). OSMOnto, which contains the various classes of POIs
as classiﬁed in OSM; ActOnto, which contains the different types of human activities
we are interested in; TimeOnto, which contains temporal references in which those
human activities can occur. These three ontologies are related by two main relations.
The ﬁrst one connects an action class to the classes of POIs, in which the action can be
performed. The second relation connects an action class to the classes of the time of
5http://brenta.disi.unitn.it/ dashdorj/Ontology/HBOnto.zip
12
day during which the action is possible. In the following, we describe each ontology
of HBOnto (Sections 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3), the relations among them (Sections 4.1.4 and
4.1.5) and how DL reasoning on HBOnto can be used to determine possible activities
at a given POI type and time (Section 4.2).
(a) The prototype framework of the HRBModel
 (b) Composition of human behav-
ioral ontology (HBOnto)
Figure 1
4.1.1 The Ontology of POI—OSMonto
A POI denotes a geo-referenced object, such as a restaurant, a shop, or a lake or other
objects, whih have a precise geographical location. In this study, we extended the ex-
isting OSMonto ontology [12], which proposes a classiﬁcation of POIs, by adding new
POI types that have recently been appended to OSM (see, for instance [40]) as well as
the new frequent POI types found in our analysis. The (extended) OSMonto ontology
is a taxonomy of POI types, that formalizes the information about POIs contained in
OSM. The POIs are encoded in the OSM as in the form of a pair ⟨key,value⟩. This
information is transformed in order to be represented in OSMOnto. The key is a type
of POI that includes a preﬁx “ k ”, and the value is a sub type of POI that includes a
preﬁx “v ”. However, according to the OSM tagging structure about POIs, some POIs
might have the same “ v ” value denoting different sub-types based on the “ k ” key.
For instance, a POI ⟨railway,train⟩, and a POI ⟨route,train⟩both have the same
values. In this case, we represent those types of POIs as the combination of the key and
the value, for instance in k railway v train. An example of the classes of POIs in
OSMOnto is shown in Figure 2. We added manually the recent POI types appeared in
OSM. In total, 517 POI types are used in OSMonto. We discard and exclude the irrel-
evant POIs, for example, those do not reﬂect a human action like benches, chimneys,
power towers. and trash bins.
13
Figure 2: OSMOnto ontology for POI classes
4.1.2 The Ontology of Human Activity—ActOnto
The ActOnto ontology is a taxonomy of human activities. ActOnto contains totally
217 human activity classes hierarchically organized in different levels up to four lev-
els. The upper level is composed of 10 activity types (see the Table 2). Various
sources are exploited to classify those activities, such as Yellow Pages 6, Human Re-
source Management7, and Olympic Games 8 and we also asked for support from do-
main experts. The ontology has been constructed manually. Figure 3 shows the top
two levels of the human activities taxonomy. We use description logic to formalize
the hierarchy of human activities with axioms. For example, travel by airplane ⊑
travel by transport,travel by car⊑travel by transport
.
4.1.3 The Ontology of Time—TimeOnto
Human activities are also correlated to time and, in particular, to the time of day and
the day of week. For example, in early morning, people have breakfast and in the af-
ternoon people have lunch. For the task of activity detection, we are more interested in
a qualitative representation of time than ﬁne-grained time measurements. The Time-
Onto ontology is designed for modeling time in qualitative terms (e.g., late morning),
organizing them into a containment hierarchy (e.g., morning includes late morning).
The qualitative terms fuzzify numerical time periods. A representation of how fuzzy
6http://www.yellowpages.ca/business/
7http://mayor2.dia.ﬁ.upm.es/oeg-upm/ﬁles/hrmontology/hrmontology-RDF.zip
8http://swat.cse.lehigh.edu/resources/onto/olympics.owl
14
Table 2: Human activity categories in ActOnto
Top level classes of activitiesType of POIs
eating fast food, food court, restaurant, cafe
shopping grocery, general stores
health medicine activity hospital, pharmacy
entertainment activity bar, casino, movie, theater
education activity library, university school
transportation traveling airplane, bus, car, train
outdoor activity sightseeing, personal care, religious places
sporting activity car racing, summer, winter sports
working activity professional work place, industrial place
residential activity guest house, hotel, hostel, residential building
times/days are hierarchically organized is given by following axioms in description
Logic:
morning ⊑time
early morning ⊑morning
mid morning ⊑morning
. . .
weekday ⊑day
holiday ⊑day
Saturday ⊑holiday
Sunday ⊑holiday
. . .
In total, 17 classes of fuzzy time and 10 classes of fuzzy day are described in the
ontology.
4.1.4 Relation between POIs and Human activities
A POI activates a set of human activities that people can perform when they are in
that object, or in its neighborhood. For instance, in a restaurant people usually perform
eating activity. On a highway road, traveling by transportation is the most usual activity.
Every poii is related with a set of activities A(poii) ⊑{a1,a2,..,a n}which can be
performed or hosted there or nearby. For example, on a highway road, traveling by
car is the most usual activity. The relationship between human activities and POIs
is represented with the object property “ what can be done”. The assertion of this
15
Figure 3: Hierarchy of human activity classes are visualized in two levels down from
the top level of human activity classes in ActOnto in which the nodes are the top level
of activities and the leaves are the second level of activities
relationship [29] is an existential restriction that is exempliﬁed by the following axiom,
which states that for every highway road there is an activity of the typetraveling by car,
which is possible: v highway ⊑∃what can be done.traveling by car. As a result,
we deﬁned around 151 associations between human activities and corresponding POI
types.
4.1.5 Relation between Human activities and Time periods
The activities of a user are highly inﬂuenced by his location. For instance, if a person is
close to a university, the most probable activities are studying, teaching, and working.
In order to capture this dependency, we ﬁrst need to model which activities can be
performed or hosted within or nearby every POI (e.g., eating is possible in a restaurant,
16
while traveling is possible on a railway). Different activities have different timetables;
these timetables may depend on a particular context/culture, e.g., the city of Trento.
Then we performed the experimental evaluation.
• shopping activity [9 :00 am,12:00 pm.], [3:00 pm.,6:00 pm.], except Sunday.
• eating activity [8:00 am.,2:00 pm.], [6:00 pm.,10:00 pm.].
• entertaiment activity [8:00 pm.,3:00 am.].
Every human activity type is related with a set of times/daysA(ti) ⊑{a1,a2,..,a n}.
This relationship between time of the day and human activities is represented with an
object property, “is usually done during” and the relationship between days and hu-
man activities is designed as an object property “is usually done on”. The assertion
of these relationships is an existential restriction, which is speciﬁed using the following
example axiom in DL:shopping⊑activity⊓∃is usually done during.(morning⊓
afternoon) ⊓∃is usually done on.(weekday ⊓saturday). This axiom should be
read as “every shopping activity can be possibly performed in the morning and in the
afternoon except on Sunday”. We attempt to associate time periods to all actions using
the above type of axiom accordingly. As a result, all human activities in HBOnto are
associated with the day of the week and the dime during the day.
4.2 Usage of the HBOnto ontology
We explain the formulas of the ontology for deriving of a set of human activities that
could be performed in a certain POI during a certain time of the day and day of the
week. We use an axiom for deriving the activities. We use a DL reasoner, for instance,
FACT++ reasoner in Pellet9.
4.2.1 Deriving Human Activities in a Given POI type
For deriving a set of human activities from a certain POI, there is a boolean valid-
ity function V AL(poii,ai) that indicates whether an activity is valid or is not in poii
which exploits the reasoning of the axioms deﬁned, as the following example axiom:
v highway ⊑∃what can be done.traveling by car.
4.2.2 Deriving Human Activities at a certain time and day
For extracting a set of human activities in a certain time of the day and day of the
week, there is a validity boolean function V AL (ai,ti,di) that indicates whether an
activity is valid or is not at ti in di. The function is derived from the reasoning axioms
9http://clarkparsia.com/pellet/
17
Figure 4: Example of a classiﬁer atomic formula for human activities on weekday early
afternoons
called derived facts. For example, in order to derive what are the activities that are
usually done during the early afternoon of workdays as the following example axiom:
workday early afternoon activity ≡activity⊓
∃is usually done during.early afternoon ⊓∃is usually done on.workday
We modeled 52 axioms for this reasoning. For example, a reasoning on human
activities in the early afternoon of weekday is shown Figure 4.
4.3 Stochastic behavior model (SBM)
The HBOnto ontology provides a set of possible actions, a stochastic model (SBM) -
the other component of the HRBModel we propose - tries to rank the actions on the ba-
sis of the number of POIs of certain type and the distance from them, and a fuzzy model
from the time of the day. Thus we compute as following:P(a|l,t,d ) =P(a|l)∗P(a|t,d)
P(a) ,
where conditional independence of land time periods ⟨t,d⟩in given a. Section 4.3.1
explains the estimation of the P(a|t,d) based on the relative importance of action in
certain time period t of d employing Fuzzy model. Section 4.3.2 describes the esti-
mation of the P(a|l) based on the relative importance of POIs in location lemploying
TF-IDF. Section 4.3.3 shows how this approach can be generalized to P(a|l,r) in or-
der to account for POIs that are in a larger neighborhood of the user to make the model
18
more robust. P(a) is the total probability of actions occur in all locations and all certain
time periods of all days.
4.3.1 Likelihood of human activity in a given time/day
The probability of human activity that happens at a certain time and day is P(a|t,d)
that is a probability computed using the Fuzzy Reasoning model, as described in the
following formula: P(a|t,d) = S(FM(a))
S(FM(t,d)) , where S(x) is a fuzzy controller which
estimates the area of the fuzzy values (fuzzy sets are represented in trapezoidal curve),
FM(a) is a trapezoidal fuzzy membership function for possible values of action seta;
a∈A, A={eating, working, studying,...}and FM(t,d) is a trapezoidal fuzzy member-
ship function for possible values of timeset t; t∈T, T={early morning, mid morning,
late morning, mid day,..,late night}. For example, Figure 5(a) illustrates that the fuzzy
sets for the morning time (interval [6:00 am.,11:00 am.], for the having breakfast activ-
ity (interval [6:00 am.,10:00 am.]), for the afternoon time and so on. In this example,
the probability of having breakfast in the morning is the intersection between the fuzzy
set of morning time period and the fuzzy set of having breakfast. This intersection im-
plies the probability of the action occurring during a certain time period and it is com-
puted as the trapezoid area estimation in the fuzzy controller: S(x) =
22∑
i=0
xi+1+xi
2 ∗h,
where h is the height of the trapezoid and equal to 1, ai are the fuzzy set values of
action a; a∈A, A= {eating, working, studying,...}, ti are the fuzzy set values of time
period t; t∈T, T= {early morning, mid morning, late morning, mid day,..,late night},
iis a parameter for time interval by hour (i=0,1,2...,22).
(a) Fuzzy intervals for morning time (blue),
having breakfast activity (red), midday (yel-
low), afternoon (purple), evening (green)
(b) Minimum cartesian distance between the
centroid point of the circle with the aggregation
radius r and the nearby areas
Figure 5
19
4.3.2 Likelihood of Human Activity from a set of POIs in a Given Location
POIs are the most important factors affecting the likelihood of activity occurrence.
But not all the POIs has the same weight. Some POIs, such as bus stops, small
shops, ATM, etc., which frequently occur in several areas, have a minor discrimina-
tive inﬂuence on the likelihood estimation than very distinctive POIs, like an airport
or a swimming pool. Borrowing the approach commonly used in the Information Re-
trieval, we estimate the importance of POIs in a given area by the Term Frequency-
Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) [55] function. In this case, the Term Fre-
quency (TF) factor measures the frequency of a POI in a given area, while the Inverse
Document Frequency (IDF) factor gives an indication of the general discriminative
power of a POI. A high IDF factor is associated with POIs that are rare while a low
IDF factor is associated with POIs that are very common and thus are of low use-
fulness for distinguishing among different areas. For these common POIs, the ratio
inside the logarithm of the IDF formula approaches 1, bringing the TF-IDF closer to
0. More in details, the weight of the POIs in location l is estimated by the formula,
tf-idf(f,l) = N(f,l)
argmax
w
{N(w,l):w∈l} ∗log |L|
|{l∈L:f∈l}|, where f is a given POI; f ∈F,
F={building, hospital, supermarket,...}and lis a given location; l∈L, L={location1,
location2, location3,...}, N(f,l) is the number of occurrence that POI f appears in lo-
cation l and argmax
w
{N(w,l) : w ∈l}is the maximum occurrence of all the POIs
in location l, |L|is the number of all locations, |{l ∈L : f ∈l}|is the number of
locations, where POI f appears. This way, after we assign a weight to each POI in
a given area, we retrieve a set of human activities relevant to those POIs in the area
by performing reasoning on the HBOnto ontology. A weight of POIs is propagated
to the relevant actions, and the total weight of a given action is estimated as follow:
W(a,l) = ∑
f∈F(a)
tf-idf(f,l)
|A(f)| , where ais the action in location l, f is the element of
POI types which derive action a, |A(f)|is the number of elements (actions) in the set
A(f), and F(a) is the set of POI types associated to the action a. The probability of
human activity that happen in location l is a probability given by P(a|l) = W(a,l)
W(l) ,
where W(a,l) is the weight of human activity a that occurs in location l; l ∈L, L=
{location1, location2, location3,... }, and W(l) is the total weight of all activities that
occur in location l.
4.3.3 Likelihood of human activity from a set of POIs in or nearby locations
In some cases, the correct activity for a user cannot be predicted properly based on the
POIs immediately close to the user. This happens, for instance, if the user is moving
and starts a phone call before reaching his intended destination where the activity will
take place. To tackle these cases, we propose an extension of the stochastic model that
20
also takes into account POIs that are not located in the user location but can be ﬁnd
considering a larger neighborhood.
Starting with the centroid of a location, we consider POIs in locations within 100
m, as a default aggregation radius of the point. If the total number of POI’s in those
locations is at lower than h=50 (as a default), we expand the aggregation radius by 25
m until the number of POIs in the intersecting locations is higher than h, or until the
aggregation radius reaches to maximum radius of 3.000 m which was chosen consis-
tently aligned with the maximum coverage of, for instance, mobile phone cells. As
an example, Figure 5(b) shows that four nearby locations fall inside the aggregation
radius r of the centroid point of a given location. The weight of the activities in such
areas is estimated depending on the intersecting weight [0,1] of the nearby locations
fall inside the circle: li ∈L(l,r). So we extend P(a|l) using aggregation radius r,
which is the likelihood estimation of the human activities in given locationl as the for-
mula: P(a|l,r) =
∑
li∈L(l,r)
{W(a,li)∗λi}
∑
li∈L(l,r)
∑
aj∈A(li)
{W(aj,li)∗λi}, where W(a,l) is the weight of action
ain location l, and A(li) is the set of actions in location li. The λi is the intersection
weight [0,1] that is measured by the minimum cartesian distance between the centroid
point of the circle with radius r given by the centroid point of locationland the closest
point of nearby areas λi = 1−{di:di<=r}
r , where di is the distance of nearby location
i, in which the distance is equal or lower than the r of the circle. For instance, if a
nearby location falls in the circle, the intersection weight is 1, if not, it is lower than
1. Given λi, the {W(a,li) ∗λi}is the activity weight in the intersecting locations that
fall inside the circle. The following example introduces the human activities with a
likelihood measure, which could be performed in the morning of workday for a given
set of POIs in a location as shown in Table 3.
POIs CountWeightActivities in a given locationActivities in the morning of workdayProbability
⟨tourism,hostel⟩ 1 0.3
relaxing at homerelaxing at home 0.1having breakfasthaving breakfast 0.1having lunchhaving dinner⟨natural,tree⟩ 10 1.5 hiking hiking 0.6⟨highway,busstop⟩ 1 0.02 traveling by bus traveling by bus 0.01
Table 3: The HRBModel inference for human actions in the morning of workday
4.4 Usage of the HRBModel
The HBRModel estimates the probability of an action to happen in a region on the bases
of the frequency of POIs. POIs are bias across areas. Because some locations (i.e., the
center of the city) have many POIs that could derive many actions and locations (i.e.,
the remote area) have few POIs that could lead to few actions. So, we cannot divide
21
a region in areas of the same dimension, but we have to take into account the number
of POIs included in an area. We consider the areas to be well characterized in terms
of POIs. We divide a territory into grid cells(=locations) in order to have uniformly
distributed POIs across locations. We consider Openstreetmap (OSM) as the source of
POIs, as it is open and free. We ﬁrst describe how POI information (human activity
relevant) can be extracted from OSM for a given location. Then we described how a
territory can be organized into locations satisfying certain properties on the basis of
available location and POI data. An default and spatial rectangular grid is designed for
populating the representative POIs (i.e., related human activities) at each location. The
area of a region or territory is divided into unit areas, where each unit size of the grid
is 50 m2 and in each of that we populate the POIs.
We build a density-based POI distribution grid for a territory which have a thresh-
old number of POIs in each cell(=location) of the grid (in a default conﬁguration, the
aggregation radius is 0). The default grid is then re-partitioned using Quad-Trees [20]
in a way that each unit area (=location) contains h ∈[10,20] number of POI’s. The
Quad-trees are commonly used to partition two dimensional space by recursively sub-
dividing it into four quadrants or regions. The regions might be square or rectangular,
or might have arbitrary shapes. We deﬁne this re-partitioned grid as a density-based
POI distribution grid, in which the locations in urban spaces have a smaller size of
coverage as the POI density is higher and the locations in remote spaces have a larger
size of coverage as the POI density is lower. In our analysis, we discard and exclude
the irrelevant POIs, for example, those do not reﬂect any human activity like benches,
chimneys, power towers. and trash bins.
5 Evaluation
In this section, we performed three types of evaluation for the applicability of the pre-
dictive model, HRBModel, taking various types of spatial and temporal data and their
factors into account:
• Evaluation through user feedback
• Evaluation through bank card transaction data revealing actual human economic
activities
• Extended evaluation of the model
22
5.1 Evaluation through user feedback
We designed an experimental application for collecting user feedback data to validate
our HRBModel. The user feedback was collected in the city of Trento, Italy. We then
present the experimental outcome and evaluation results. The goal of the experiment
was to understand whether human activities associated with a given area at a given
time in our fuzzy model are correct, activities are evaluated with respect to the feed-
back provided by a set of users. The application recommends a list of top- k possible
human activities at each user-chosen context and then users identiﬁed evaluate the cor-
rect activity he/she performed from the list. The application shows the map of Trento
overlaid by the density-based POI distribution grid of the mobile network coverage
map. The interface of the application is illustrated in Figure 6. The ﬁgure shows the
most probable activity in top-k is predicted to the user. The preliminary analysis of this
evaluation was introduced in our previous work [15]: in this work, we improved the
fuzzy reasoning model and re-analyzed the geographical area with richer content.
Figure 6: Visualization of demonstration app, at Piazza Duomo on weekday mornings
In building this application, ﬁrst of all, we needed to build a density-based POI
distribution grid for this city: for this we collected 4.6 million POIs extracted from
the OSM. Using Quantium GIS 10, the map of the city has been divided into a grid
of dimensions 401 x 302 cells in the beginning, where each unit size of the grid is
50 m2. The cells are partitioned using quad-tree in a way that each unit area (i.e.,
location) contains h ∈[10,20] size of representative POIs. The re-partitioned locations
containing threshold h number of POIs are represented in Figure 7(b). In total, 3,150
locations were processed. Using the data from OSM, we populated the POIs at each
10www2.qgis.org
23
location with those contained in, crossed over located on the border of, or intersected
with that location. In total 135,918 relevant POIs were extracted across the locations:
this number was reduced to 31,514 after cleaning and discarding irrelevant POIs (i.e.,
those that do not reﬂect relevant human activity).
(a) POI distribution in Trento
 (b) Density-based POI distribution grid
in Trento
Figure 7
Figure 8(a) shows the comparison of number changes of the items (i.e. raw and
reﬁned POI and extracted human activities) across locations in scatter plot. The reﬁned
number of POIs are 10 times lower than the number of raw POIs after the cleaning and
discarding irrelevant POIs. The number of human activities extracted from the reﬁned
POIs are 5 times lower than the raw POIs after the activity inference. The density
distributions of number of POIs and human activities across locations are represented
in Figure 8(b), where the density curves are Gaussian types. This ﬁgure shows that
across locations, the minimum, median, and maximum number of POI are 15, 38, and
375, and the minimum, median, and maximum number for human activity are 1, 9,
and 59. The remote areas are described in the left tail of the distribution that contain a
small number of POIs and human activities, up to the mode of the density distribution
of POIs 37, and human activities 9. The dense areas are described in the right tail of
the distribution that contain the number of POIs and human activities are up to 375 and
59, respectively.
To populate a sufﬁcient number and diversity of POIs in each location, we consider
the nearby areas for estimating the likelihood of human activities. The nearby areas are
the intersected locations within the aggregation radius of the centroid point at each lo-
cation. The aggregation radius is conﬁgured differently for each location: this satisﬁes
24
(a) The changes of the number of reﬁned POIs
(green) and extracted human activities (reddish)
compared to the raw POIs, aggregation radius=0
(b) The distributions of POIs and human activities
across locations, aggregation radius=0 (i.e. default
conﬁguration)
Figure 8: The representative POIs and human activity distribution
the need for the total number of POIs in such intersected locations to be above thresh-
old h (see Figure 9), where each location has at least h(=50) number of POIs in the
intersected locations. Across locations, the minimum, median, and maximum number
of POIs are 14, 55, and 268. The distinct activities and parent level of distinct activities
are estimated in each location using the aggregation radius. The main types of POI in
Trento city include building, land-use, amenity, and highway types (see Figure 10(b))
and the main human activities extracted from these POIs are mostly related to eating,
residential, and work activities (see Figure 10(a)).
Our web application is able to recommend a set of top-k human activities in a given
location and time of the user selection. However, multiple activities that have the same
priority can occur at the same time. In this experiment, we do not evaluate the order
of activities in the prediction due to the limitation of ﬁne-grained ground-truth data we
use. So we concentrate only on the “fuzziﬁcation” of the activity prediction, which
evaluates if one of the activities among top- k prediction performed by the application
is correct or not. However, we can further evaluate the order of the activity prediction
if the ground-truth data we use is ﬁne grained. So, a user evaluation among the ﬁrst
k predictions can be an initial evaluation to measure the accuracy of the model perfor-
mance. In any of the above locations, upon selection, the user is prompted with a list of
top-k human activities associated with the time of day, having the highest likelihood.
The user is then asked to select those activities that he or she has actually performed by
in that area at that time. The user is also allowed to select an activity not in the top- k
list among all the available activities, in case none of the above ﬁts.
25
Figure 9: POI and the relevant distinct human activity distribution using aggregation
radius
(a) Distribution of POI categories across loca-
tions of the POI distribution grid, and of lo-
cations of the POI distribution grid containing
POI categories, aggregation radius=0
(b) Distribution of activity categories across lo-
cations of the POI distribution grid, and of lo-
cations of the POI distribution grid containing
activity categories, aggregation radius=0
Figure 10: Semantics of POIs and activity distribution over Trento, Italy
We collected user feedback through the web application described above for one
week with 32 participants involved. We then analyzed the collected user feedback
in order to measure the accuracy of the HRBModel. We measured the accuracy of the
model. For the latter, we took into consideration only the areas with the highest amount
of feedback, Downtown and Povo.
To measure the accuracy of the approach, we consider the prediction of an activity
correct if the user selected it in the web application regardless of its ordering posi-
26
tion. Within the total of 481 items of users’ feedback collected, if we consider a set
of the top-8 activities in the recommendation, the overall correctly predicted activity
percentage is 68% (k=8). There, we propagated the probability activities to their child
activities. We increased the prediction granularity of the activity to k=n, where n is
the total number of distinct activities, and the overall prediction percentage was raised
to 93%. By changing the granularity of activity level to high-level (parent) human ac-
tivities, the prediction accuracy is increased up to 80% ( k=8), and 97% ( k=n). When
we ignore the time for estimating the likelihood of human activities, the accuracy per-
centage was lower 57% (k=8) but stable at 97% for k=n. This might be because some
human activities are tightly related to the location and have nothing to do with time.
For example, if there is an open football stadium, people tend to play there at any time
they like.
So the overall prediction percentage is affected by how we choose the threshold top-
k of the prediction granularity. This might be a reason that the prediction percentage as
well as its granularity can vary at the different local scales. However, the user feedback
did not have enough distribution over the city. So we selected two geographical areas;
the center of the city and Povo. In these locations, we have sufﬁcient feedback to eval-
uate the model at the different local scales. The center of the city is characterized with
different types of activity, while the Povo is mostly characterized with studying and
research work activities as our participants are researchers. We estimated the predic-
tion accuracy in the center of the city, and the result shows that the high-level (parent)
activity prediction percentage is 98% (k=n) but 95% in Povo. This shows that there is
an attraction in the city center, so the participants who share a similar work proﬁle or
similar study proﬁle go there to perform similar activities. This result matches the ﬁnd-
ing of Phithakkitnukoon et al [45], which showed that a daily pattern of human activity
(sequence of human activity) strongly correlates with a certain type of geographic area
that shares a common characteristic context.
5.2 Evaluation through credit card data revealing human econom-
ical activities
We employed user feedback for evaluating the model in the previous section, but the
ability to reﬂect actual human activity is not perfect (note the aforementioned limita-
tions of user feedback data we collected in Trento city). Here, we introduce another
source of data that could serve as a direct proxy for human economical activity for a
more sophisticated evaluation of our HRBModel. We use bank card transaction data
collected in Barcelona, Spain which were performed at POS terminals by users. The
type of business activity at every POS terminal, for instance, at a department store or
27
a restaurant, etc., can reveal the human activities that can be performed at such a lo-
cation. With the use of this data, we evaluate the performance of our HRBModel in a
way similar to the evaluation with user feedback in the previous section.
(a) Density-based POI distribution grid in
Barcelona
(b) (Default conﬁguration) POI and human activity distribu-
tion across the locations in Barcelona, aggregation radius=0
Figure 11
First, we also needed to build a density-based POI distribution grid for the city of
Barcelona, Spain and for that we collected 2.6 million POIs extracted from OSM in a
rectangular grid with dimensions 252 x 393, where the unit size of each grid is 50 m2.
Further, we re-partitioned the grid using the quad-tree approach to ensure that each
location contains h ∈[10,20] POIs. Final partitioning is presented in Figure 11(a).
In total, 3,853 locations were processed. Using the data coming OSM, we populated
the POIs that were contained in, crossed over, were located on the border of, or in-
tersected each location. In total, 197,289 activity relevant POIs were extracted across
the locations, which was reduced to 53,529 after the cleaning and discarding of irrel-
evant (POIs those that do not reﬂect any human activity). Figure 11(b) summarizes
the POI ﬁltering results compared to the raw POIs. In this case the POIs are 5 times
lower compared to the number raw POIs in each location. The ﬁgure also shows the
corresponding human activities to POIs that were generated after the raw POI cleaning
process. The POI and human activity density distribution across the locations are rep-
resented in Figure 11(b), where the density curve is skewed in the center. The ﬁgure
also shows that across locations, the min, median, and max number of POI are 1, 47,
and 545, and the min, median, and max number for human activity are 1, 13, and
46. The remote areas contain a small number of POIs and human activities, up to the
mode of the density distribution of POIs 32 and human activities 12. In dense areas,
28
Figure 12: POI and the relevant distinct human activity distribution considering aggre-
gation radius
the number of POIs and human activities are up to 545, and 46, respectively. These
POIs and human activities are the representative activities in each location.
To populate a sufﬁcient number and diversity of POIs in each location, we consider
the nearby areas for estimating the likelihood of human activities. The nearby areas
are the intersected locations within the aggregation radius of the centroid point at each
location. The aggregation radius is conﬁgured differently in each location, which sat-
isﬁes the need for the total number of POIs in such intersected locations to be above
the threshold h (see Figure 12) where each location has at least h=50 number of POI’s
in the intersected locations. Across locations, the minimum, median, and maximum
number of POIs are 18, 55, and 162. The distinct activities and parent level of distinct
activities are estimated in each location using the aggregation radius.
The main types of POI in Barcelona city are highway, building, and route types
(see Figure 13(b)) and the main human activities extracted from these POIs are eating,
residential, and sporting (see Figure 13(a)).
We performed the evaluation of the model to measure the accuracy of the approach
in same way as we have done in Trento city, but here we selected random POS locations
in Barcelona; assume that each POS generates correct human activities. Every POS
is associated with a business category: therefore, 76 types of businesses are given
for all the POSs, such as travel, food, hypermarkets, hotels, real estate, automation,
bars and restaurants, personal care, sport and toys, technology, home, content, fashion,
leisure, health, transport, etc. Since we use both POIs and POSs in the data sets in
our evaluation, we adjust them so that they are comparable to avoid a semantic gap
29
(a) Distribution of POI categories across lo-
cations of the POI distribution grid, and
of locations of the POI distribution grid
containing POI categories, aggregation ra-
dius=0
(b) Distribution of activity categories across
locations of the POI distribution grid, and of
locations of the POI distribution grid contain-
ing activity categories, aggregation radius=0
Figure 13: Semantics of POIs and activity distribution over Barcelona
between the data sets. For instance, when a customer buys groceries in a supermarket,
POS interprets that a customer is doing shopping in grocery stores. The POIs and
POSs use different activity type taxonomies, so they need to be mapped to a common
taxonomy for comparability. We deﬁne consistent activity types for POS using the
human activities described in ActOnto. We discard POIs and POSs that have no activity
type reﬂected in it, such as ATM use.
For evaluating the HRBModel, we compared the human activities of a given POS
with the set of top- k human activities generated by HRBModel in the same context
of POS location and time, using the aggregation radius of nearby areas for estimating
the likelihood of human activities, as we described in Section 4. We performed this
validation by selecting 1,000 random POSs in the city. The overall accuracy of parent
level activity prediction percentage is 82% (k=8) and 92% (k=n). When we ignore the
time, the parent level activity prediction percentage is stable at 92% ( k=n). This also
shows that some human activities are tightly related to the location and have nothing to
do with time. However, the random selection of POS is not a sophisticated choice for
analyzing the granularity of the prediction task in the city scale. We need to estimate
the accuracy fraction at the local scales to know where the HRBModel gives better
accuracy and good precision.
30
5.3 Extended evaluation of the model
In this section, we consider an extensive validation of the HRBModel in order to esti-
mate if POI data can be a good proxy for predicting such a specialized type of activity
(economical activity) at the local scale. For that purpose, we compare the possible
activity distribution predicted by our model for each location across the city with the
actual data on the observed spending activity in POS at that location. This gives us
ground-truth information on for instance, what types of economic activity are occur-
ring in a city. However, spatial data (i.e., POI and POS data) distribution (see Figure
14) is very uncertain and heterogeneous, and extracting meaningful information from
it is a very challenging task. The data can be imprecise and not available in some areas.
The heterogeneity of the data directly inﬂuences the conﬁdence regarding how the data
is characterized. We performed city-wide normalization of POI activity distribution to
match that of POS, and then matched the different categories of human activities in
the POI and POS data, which gives good accuracy and good precision both at the local
scale and for different land-use types.
In our analysis, POS data reﬂects spending activity on a ﬁne-grained scale, eco-
nomic activities, which are very important component of spending activity. The POI
data, on the other hand, is coarse grained, and each of its points represent a single
coarse-grained geographical object, not the objects within it. For example, POS ma-
chines are associated with every store at the mall, and the type of POS represents a type
of activity performed at the store. But in POI data, the mall could be represented as
a single building of type “mall”, which does not contain any information about stores
within the mall. This granularity difference causes a quantitative difference in the cat-
egories of activities in between the POI and POS data. These differences could intro-
duce a substantial bias in the model performance. To achieve comparable performance
between the data sets, which would enable using POI data for predicting economic ac-
tivity, we ﬁrst need to remove the overall systematic bias of the data sets. We introduce
a global normalization to make POIs and POSs consistent at the macro-level in order
to account for possible heterogeneity in the representativity across different categories
of activities in the two data sets.
We generate the distribution of different human activities in POI and POS data as
depicted in Figure 15, where non-economic activities including educational, outdoor,
residential, sporting, and working types of activity, have less of a value in the both dis-
tributions of different activities in POI and POS data. An economic activity is a special
but very important component of spending and here we hypothesize that POIs can be
used to predict the economic activity after appropriate normalization (i.e., WpoiNorm)
for the general data set representativity bias on the city scale. The result might also be
associated with the fact that spending is just one of the components of human activity
31
(a) POI distribution in Barcelona
 (b) POS distribution in Barcelona
Figure 14: POI and POS distribution in Barcelona
Figure 15: Overall economical activity distribution in each data set, 1) POI 2) POS
and not all activities have something to do with spending.
For each location l we have certain distribution of POIs among n categories of
activity we consider with relative weights, Wpoi(a,l) and estimate the likelihood of
human activities extracted from POIs starting with the centroid of location, considering
the POIs in all locations within 100 m of the point, as we described in Section 4. Here
we use a larger radius size in case there are not enough POIs within a considered circle:
we expanded the aggregation radius by 25 m if fewer than 50 POI’s and POSs were
contained in intersecting locations, or until the radius reaches to 3.000 m. This also
gives a sufﬁcient number of POIs in remote areas. The aggregation radius selected in
each location is presented in Figure 16(a). The length of each location size is processed
in cumulative probability after the aggregation radius selection, as plotted in Figure
16(b). So, 80% of total locations are increased to the length of 2,000 m. Figure 17(a)
32
shows the number of POIs and POSs at each location using the cumulative probability
function. Across locations, the minimum, median, and maximum number of POI are
18, 93, and 958, and are 3, 55, and 952, respectively, for POS.
Now before comparing the values of Wpoi with Wpos, we look at the overall distri-
butions ﬁrst, (i.e., Wpoi(a,c) vs Wpos(a,c) where cis the entire city). It might happen
that those average relative weights are also not the same if there exists a systematic
bias introduced by the way POS and POI are deﬁned (for example, it could happen that
each restaurant appears in POIs but only 50% of restaurants appear in POS (say, not
all of them accept cards) and this situation could change from one category to another.
The overall POI and POS distribution across the city is depicted in Figure 15, where
the global distributions are relatively similar for the type of activity labeled, eating. So,
if this systematic bias exists, then it is no surprise that we will also see a difference for
any particular location, which would reduce our reported accuracy.
In order to account for this bias we consider the following normalization:
WpoiNorm(a,l) =Wpoi(a,l)∗Wpos(a,c)
Wpoi(a,c) and for each location we compare Wpos(a,l) vs
WpoiNorm(a,l) (which is already normalized by the possible systematic bias between
POS and POI distributions) instead of Wpoi(a,l). In each location, the bias between
Wpos(a,l) vs WpoiNorm(a,l) is compared by the Hellinger distance [37, 57, 58] mea-
sure, which quantiﬁes the similarity between two probability distributions and lies be-
tween 0 and 1. So we call it as an estimate error between the two distribution:
HD(WpoiNorm,Wpos) = 1√
2
√∑k
i=1(
√
WpoiNorm(i,l) −
√
Wpos(i,l))2, where i
is an activity of n category in each location.
(a) Variation of aggregation radius in each location
 (b) Variation of the location length after the ag-
gregation
Figure 16
The estimate error between the distribution of activities in POI and POS data in a
given location is called local estimate error, and the estimate error between the distri-
33
(a) POI and POS distribution across the location
in the aggregation radius
(b) The POI and POS normalized estimate error vs
local estimate error
Figure 17
bution of activities inPOInorm and POS in a given location is calledPOI normalized
estimate error. The estimate error between the distribution of activities in POI and
POSnorm in a given location is called POS normalized estimate error. The density
distribution of local estimate errors, and the POI and POS normalized estimate errors
are described by logistic distribution ﬁt across all the locations within the city as de-
picted in Figure 17(b). The peak (mode) of the POI normalized estimate error gives the
smallest error values compared to the local and POS normalized estimate error values.
The peak (mode) of the POI normalized estimate error distribution density falls at 0.18,
which represents an 82% match in accuracy between the POI and POS data. Either way,
POS normalized estimate error would give the same distribution, but the mode of the
distribution is lower. On the other hand, the peak (mode) of the local estimate error
distribution density falls at 0.40, which is around 60% accuracy on the POI and POS
match. So if we make two distributions comparable by de-biasing them globally, the
global estimate error is approximately reduced by 22%, which is the quantitative differ-
ence between the POI and POS data sets. For the general data set representativity bias
on the city scale (which might also be associated with the fact that spending is just one
of the components of human activity and that not all activities involve spending). From
the results of previous section, we note that POI data can be used as a proxy to predict
human activities after appropriate normalization. We will show that once overall city
normalization is performed, two data sets start to give comparable estimates for human
activity at the local scale: this means that one needs to know only the overall bias on the
city scale and then POI data can be applied to predict actual human activities. As POS
reveals actual human economic activity, we propose to use POI to estimate economic
activity when POS data is not available.
34
(a) The number of POIs in each random location
of different land-use types
(b) The number of POSs in each random location
of different land-use types
Figure 18: The number of POI and POS in each random location selected in different
land-use types
(a) Variation of aggregation radius selected of random
locations in different land use types
(b) Variation of an overall estimated error of
economical activities prediction with respect to
POI normalized and actual POS activities
Figure 19
As we have seen above, the estimate error distribution is of Gaussian type and on
the left tail, the prediction percentage is better (around 84-95%), while the right tail
is heavy tailed down to 20%. This could be an effect of land-use types, where the
distribution of activities in POI and POS data is well described in some type of land
areas and not in others. For instance, while POS data about economic-type activity, it is
supposed to have strong match in railway, commercial and dense areas. Therefore, we
investigate the POI normalized estimate error distribution in different land-use types,
which are referenced by OSM: industrial, recreational, commercial, railway, retail,
residential, and the central part of the city. We randomly selected up to 100 locations
35
(a) Differences in predicted levels of different
types of activity across various locations vs ob-
served activity levels in dense (the center of the
city) land-use based on POS data
(b) Differences in predicted levels of different
types of activity across various locations vs ob-
served activity levels in railway land-use based
on POS data
Figure 20
in each land-use type, which were chosen in order to be consistent with the previous
work in [16]. The populated sufﬁcient POIs and POSs in each location (see Figures
18(a), 18(b)) using the aggregation radius (see Figure 19(a)). We excluded the outlier
locations whose aggregation radius was more than 1,000 m, which removed 9% of the
total locations randomly selected.
The POI normalized estimate error distribution in those land-use types is shown in
Figure 19(b), where the railway, commercial, and dense areas show lower error values
with the accuracy of (81–90%): this is to be expected, since we validated the POI data
with the POS data, which is mostly related to shops. In the railway area, we got the
lowest error values, with an accuracy of 88–90%. In a dense area (the center of the
city), the POI normalized estimate error with the accuracy of (81-84%), and the error
distribution is signiﬁcantly heavy tailed as the area consists of a wide range of human
activities. The commercial land-use is also well described with the accuracy of 86%,
while the industrial and recreational ground types of land-use have lower accuracy than
72%. In order to estimate the sensitive error values among the different categories of
activities at those local distributions of POI and POS data, for instance, in dense and
railway areas, we estimated the POI normalized percentage difference, which is an er-
ror between WpoiNorm(a,l) vs Wpos(a,l) among the different categories of activities.
The percentage difference is a difference between two values divided by the average
of the two values, then PD(WpoiNorm(a,l),Wpos(a,l)) = |WpoiNorm (a,l)−Wpos(a,l)|
WpoiNorm (a,l)+Wpos(a,l) .
Figures 20(a) and 20(b) show the POI normalized percentage difference among the
different categories of activities in dense and railway areas. In dense areas, among the
categories, the shopping activity has the lowest error (around 11–17%) in the distribu-
36
tion of activities between the POI normalized and POS as shops are mostly located in
the center of the city. Also in railway areas, the shopping activity has the lowest error
(around 3–7%) in the distribution of activities as we evaluated economic-type activities
from POI and POS. The health and medical activity has an error value of almost 100%,
as actions of this type are not usually described in POS data. However, while the analy-
sis suffers from a lack of POIs and POSs information collected the model applicability
error can be more meaningful for estimating the data loss. The representativity of the
data sets by the global normalization at the city scale allows us to estimate how well
POI data can predict human activity at the global scale, and the result was validated in
land-use types (e.g., railway and dense land-uses).
6 Possible developments (extensions)
We presented in previous sections that the HRBModel was developed in order to infer
human activities by extracting concepts and their relations from open geographical
data. In this section, we brieﬂy explain how the correlation between context and human
behavior encoded in HRBModel, can be exploited to infer human behavior from CDR
data. To this purpose, we enrich CDR with human activities, which are derived from
our model through location and time.
(a) regular coverage
 (b) irregular coverage
Figure 21: Example of the two extreme cases of cell coverage area
As we mentioned earlier, our main contribution of this article is to use background
knowledge regarding human activities that could happen in the context where mobile
network events occur [13, 14]. The most common mobile network antennas are GSM
900 and GSM 1800. Each antenna covers a certain area for the support of mobile com-
munication. Sometimes, cell coverage areas are not precisely deﬁned, and they can
be temporarily modiﬁed depending on the estimation of call trafﬁc from/to an area.
Usually, the size of the coverage areas is inversely proportional to the density of the
population inhabiting the area. However, there is an upper bound of the coverage area
37
Figure 22: Visualization of the ranked activities in the cell coverage for Gardolo area
of Trento
size due to antennas physical limits to 35 km. Concerning the shape of the cell coverage
areas one can observe that, when the territory is regular (i.e., ﬂat with no mountains or
other natural irregularities), the shape of cells can be approximated with convex poly-
gons, but in presence of irregular territory with a lot of mountains and valleys, the
region associated to a cell can be very irregular and possibly disconnected. Irregular
coverage areas makes particularly difﬁcult the task of estimating the calling point. In
other cases, the shape of cells can be very irregular and possibly disconnected. An
example of these two extreme cases are shown in Figure 21. Irregular coverage areas
make the task of estimating the calling location particularly difﬁcult. Regular coverage
is a contiguous area, and irregular coverage forms a less distinct area with many holes
and irregularities. The HRBModel can provide qualitative description of human activ-
ities associated with a likelihood measure, to each cell coverage area. For example, a
cell coverage area of Gardolo in Trento city is characterized with the possible human
activities ranked that could happen in that area, associated with its likelihood, which
is illustrated in Figure 22. In this case, travel by transport, outdoor activity, and eating
are higher ranked activities.
Contextually enriched CDR can be exploited to analyze and evaluate call patterns11
(i.e., human mobility, communication and interaction patterns) associated to human ac-
tivities for revealing existing relationships between human behaviors, and CDR stream.
This can be done through a combination of the HRBModel and the bottom-up ap-
11A call frequency pattern is a quantitative model that describes the behavior of a communication in a
certain class of contexts
38
proaches in pattern extraction tasks used in the state of the art. The qualitative and
quantitative properties in semantically enriched CDR allow us to generate training data
with a certain accuracy that, together with other behavioral data coming from bank
card transaction, social networks and so on, can be used as ground-truth information
for training those supervised learning approaches for automatic activity inference in
the area of mobile phone data analysis.
Like many factors that inﬂuence human behavior, the CDR related to such behavior
varies depending on the different situations. For example, these situations could involve
a behavioral pattern of attending a football match on rainy day or sunny day, or doing
so in the central area or in remote area. Another example of the contextual factors
that inﬂuences human behaviors is a social event. For instance, human behavior is
different during national or local holidays. While some people used to work during
national holidays, others may have vacation plans to go somewhere. This concept has
been successfully applied in [42] where we created an event repository that collected
data from the Ivory Coast city in order to analyze CDRs for the identiﬁcation and
characterization of human behavior patterns in the city. Event is an another key element
that can be used to enrich the background knowledge of mobile phone data records.
Therefore, the HRBModel is very useful for ﬁlling the missing data in spatial data-
sources, where such information is unavailable and measuring the noise, scalability and
accuracy among the spatial data-sources. For example, if economical type of activities
are not sufﬁcient enough when generated in bank card transaction data, we could com-
bine the OSM data with bank card transaction data in order to better study economical
or social and emerging types of activity [42, 47, 61, 62] at the macro level. The
most directly applicable scenario includes, for instance, at the ﬁnest scale, a seman-
tic enrichment of cell coverage areas, trajectories, and behavioral patterns (normal or
exceptional), and at the broad scale, semantic interpretation of CDR trafﬁc data more
toward smart (intelligent) city research that gain better understanding of real-life cases,
resulting in better classiﬁcation of human behaviors in a region or territory.
The HRBModel can be enabled for a further consideration of the GeoSparql exten-
sions12 in order to represent and querying of geospatial linked data, such as geo-objects
and geo-actions for the Semantic Web. The geospatial RDF/OWL data which can sup-
port both quantitative spatial reasoning on the Semantic Web and querying with the
SPARQL database query language. Further, we enrich the HRBModel with other con-
textual information like weather information, events and some other types of linked
objects and data. This possibility to extend the model further helps us to reﬁne human
behavior recognition by considering more complex and complete contextual informa-
tion (via linked open data) by employing real-time inference techniques some of which
12http://geosparql.org/
39
could be learned and decoupled with the pre-processing of features from the raw data
of mobile phones.
7 Conclusion
Even without taking a person’s environment into account, many factors inﬂuence the
collective human behavior: the geographical information system is certainly only one
of these factors. We proposed a model able to enrich mobile phone data records with
the context of human activity. The qualitative terms of the human activities can be used
for labeling the data in order to train a statistical model for automatic human behavior
recognition tasks given heterogeneous and uncertain CDR data. By leveraging data
from Web 2.0 as a source of contextual information for mobile data records, we study
the possibility to infer human activities with a certain accuracy. Our model is a combi-
nation of ontological and stochastic model, HRBModel, for predicting a set of human
activities associated with a likelihood measure in a given context of mobile phone data
records. Our study demonstrated that semantic expressiveness of human-environmental
relationships could be investigated, in principal, based on diverse geographical infor-
mation systems. The evaluation of the model was performed in two different cities and
it demonstrates the applicability and scalability of the model under the conditions of
heterogeneity and uncertainty of those spatial data sources like POI and POS data. Fur-
thermore, this model takes various types of spatial and temporal factors into account.
Based on our evaluations performed in two different cities, the prediction level depends
to some extent on the granularity of the activity being predicted. The analysis shows
that the level of activity prediction from the POI data is signiﬁcant (around 84–95%).
As we concentrated on the model evaluation for a speciﬁc economic type of activities
using point of sale bank card spending data, we validated that within areas of differ-
ent land-use types, the POI is a good proxy for predicting those economic activities
with 81–90% accuracy in dense, railway, and commercial areas. This way the context
of mobile network records can be used to deepen the context aware human activity
recognition from the mobile network events. Hence, a number of challenges remain
for future research and deeper investigations of human and environmental dynamics,
such as behavior recognition and classiﬁcation from the semantically enriched CDR.
8 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Telecom Italia Semantic Knowledge Innovation
Lab (SKIL) and Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBV A) for providing the datasets
40
for this research. The authors further thank the Fondazione Bruno Kessler Data Knowl-
edge Management Unit (FBK-DKM) as well as Ericsson, the MIT SMART Program,
the Center for Complex Engineering Systems (CCES) at KACST and MIT CCES pro-
gram, the National Science Foundation, the MIT Portugal Program, the AT&T Foun-
dation, Audi V olkswagen, BBV A, The Coca Cola Company, Expo 2015, Ferrovial,
Liberty Mutual, The Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo, UBER and all the mem-
bers of the MIT SENSEable City Lab Consortium for supporting the research.
References
[1] Amini A, Kung K, Kang C, Sobolevsky S, Ratti C (2014) The impact of social
segregation on human mobility in developing and industrialized regions. EPJ Data
Science 3(1):1–20
[2] Bagrow JP, Wang D, Barab ´asi AL (2011) Collective response of human popula-
tions to large-scale emergencies. CoRR abs/1106.0560
[3] Becker R, Caceres R, Hanson K, Loh J, Urbanek S, Varshavsky A, V olinsky C
(2011) A tale of one city: Using cellular network data for urban planning. Perva-
sive Computing, IEEE 10(4):18–26, DOI 10.1109/MPRV .2011.44
[4] Bengtsson L, Lu X, Thorson A, Garﬁeld R, von Schreeb J (2011) Improved re-
sponse to disasters and outbreaks by tracking population movements with mo-
bile phone network data: A post-earthquake geospatial study in haiti. PLoS Med
8(8):e1001,083, DOI 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001083, URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pmed.1001083
[5] Berlingerio M, Calabrese F, Di Lorenzo G, Nair R, Pinelli F, Sbodio M (2013)
Allaboard: A system for exploring urban mobility and optimizing public trans-
port using cellphone data. In: Blockeel H, Kersting K, Nijssen S, ˇZelezn´y
F (eds) Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol 8190, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp 663–
666, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-40994-3 50, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-40994-3_50
[6] Blondel VD, Esch M, Chan C, Cl ´erot F, Deville P, Huens E, Morlot F, Smoreda
Z, Ziemlicki C (2012) Data for development: the d4d challenge on mobile phone
data. CoRR abs/1210.0137
[7] Bogomolov A, Lepri B, Staiano J, Oliver N, Pianesi F, Pentland A (2014) Once
upon a crime: Towards crime prediction from demographics and mobile data.
41
In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Multimodal Interac-
tion, ACM, New York, NY , USA, ICMI ’14, pp 427–434, DOI 10.1145/2663204.
2663254, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2663204.2663254
[8] Calabrese F, C PF, Di Lorenzo G, Liu L, Ratti C (2010) The geography of taste:
analyzing cell-phone mobility and social events. In: the Proc. of the 8th in-
ternational conference on Pervasive Computing, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, (Pervasive’10), pp 22–37, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-12654-3 2, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12654-3_2
[9] Calabrese F, Colonna M, Lovisolo P, Parata D, Ratti C (2011) Real-time urban
monitoring using cell phones: A case study in rome. Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems, IEEE Transactions on 12(1):141–151, DOI 10.1109/TITS.2010.
2074196
[10] Candia J, Gonzalez MC, Wang P, Schoenharl T, Madey G, Barabasi AL (2007)
Uncovering individual and collective human dynamics from mobile phone
records
[11] Choujaa D, Dulay N (2008) Tracme: Temporal activity recognition using mobile
phone data. In: Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing, 2008. EUC ’08. IEEE/I-
FIP International Conference on, vol 1, pp 119 –126, DOI 10.1109/EUC.2008.33
[12] Codescu M, Horsinka G, Kutz O, Mossakowski T, Rau R (2011) Osmonto - an
ontology of openstreetmap tags. In: State of the map Europe (SOTM-EU)
[13] Dashdorj Z, Seraﬁni L (2013) Semantic enrichment of mobile phone data records
using linked open data. In: the Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conf. Semantic Web Con-
ference Poster and Demonstrations Track
[14] Dashdorj Z, Seraﬁni L (2013) Semantic interpretation of mobile phone records
exploiting background knowledge. In: the Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conf. Semantic
Web Conference Doctoral Consortium
[15] Dashdorj Z, Seraﬁni L, Antonelli F, Larcher R (2013) Semantic enrichment of
mobile phone data records. In: MUM, ACM, p 35
[16] Dashdorj Z, Sobolevsky S, Seraﬁni L, Ratti C (2014) Human activity recognition
from spatial data sources. In: Proceedings of the Third ACM SIGSPATIAL In-
ternational Workshop on Mobile Geographic Information Systems, ACM, New
York, NY , USA, MobiGIS ’14, pp 18–25, DOI 10.1145/2675316.2675321, URL
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2675316.2675321
42
[17] Diaz-Rodriguez N, Cadahia OL, Cuellar MP, Lilius J, Calvo-Flores MD (2014)
Handling real-world context awareness, uncertainty and vagueness in real-time
human activity tracking and recognition with a fuzzy ontology-based hybrid
method. Sensors 14(10):18,131–18,171, DOI 10.3390/s141018131, URLhttp:
//www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/14/10/18131
[18] Eagle N, Macy M, Claxton R (2010) Network diversity and economic devel-
opment. Science 328(5981):1029–1031, DOI 10.1126/science.1186605, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1186605
[19] FerrariL, BerlingerioM, CalabreseF, Curtis-DavidsonB (2013) Measuring public-
transport accessibility using pervasive mobility data. IEEE Pervasive Computing
12(1):26–33
[20] Finkel R, Bentley J (1974) Quad trees a data structure for retrieval on compos-
ite keys. Acta Informatica 4(1):1–9, DOI 10.1007/BF00288933, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00288933
[21] Frias-Martinez E, Williamson G, Frias-Martinez V (2011) An agent-based model
of epidemic spread using human mobility and social network information. In:
Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third Inernational
Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom), 2011 IEEE Third International
Conference on, pp 57–64, DOI 10.1109/PASSAT/SocialCom.2011.142
[22] Frias-martinez V , Virsesa J (2012) On the relationship between socio-economic
actors and cell phone usage. In: In ICTD
[23] Furletti B, Gabrielli L, Renso C, Rinzivillo S (2012) Identifying users proﬁles
from mobile calls habits. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International
Workshop on Urban Computing, ACM, New York, NY , USA, UrbComp ’12, pp
17–24, DOI 10.1145/2346496.2346500, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/2346496.2346500
[24] Girardin F, Vaccari A, Gerber R, Biderman A (2009) Quantifying urban attrac-
tiveness from the distribution and density of digital footprints. Journal of Spatial
Data Infrastructure Research
[25] Gonz ´alez M, Hidalgo C, Barab ´asi AL (2008) Understanding individual human
mobility patterns. Nature 453:779–782
[26] Gonzalez MC, Hidalgo CA, Barabasi AL (2008) Understanding individual human
mobility patterns. Nature 453(7196):779–782, DOI 10.1038/nature06958
43
[27] Grauwin S, Sobolevsky S, Moritz S, G ´odor I, Ratti C (2014) Towards a compar-
ative science of cities: using mobile trafﬁc records in new york, london and hong
kong. CoRR abs/1406.4400, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.4400
[28] Hawelka B, Sitko I, Beinat E, Sobolevsky S, Kazakopoulos P, Ratti C (2014) Geo-
located twitter as proxy for global mobility patterns. Cartography and Geographic
Information Science 41(3):260–271
[29] Hitzler P, Kr ¨otzsch M, Rudolph S (2009) Foundations of semantic web technolo-
gies. Chapman & Hall/CRC
[30] Horanont T, Phithakkitnukoon S, Leong TW, Sekimoto Y , Shibasaki
R (2013) Weather effects on the patterns of people’s everyday activ-
ities: A study using gps traces of mobile phone users. PLoS ONE
8(12):e81,153, DOI 10.1371/journal.pone.0081153, URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0081153
[31] Hoteit S, Secci S, Sobolevsky S, Ratti C, Pujolle G (2014) Estimating human tra-
jectories and hotspots through mobile phone data. Computer Networks 64:296–
307
[32] Kang C, Sobolevsky S, Liu Y , Ratti C (2013) Exploring human movements in
Singapore: a comparative analysis based on mobile phone and taxicab usages. In:
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGKDD international workshop on urban comput-
ing, ACM, p 1
[33] Krings G, Calabrese F, Ratti C, Blondel VD (2009) Urban gravity: a model for
inter-city telecommunication ﬂows. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
Experiment 2009(07):L07,003+, DOI 10.1088/1742-5468/2009/07/l07003, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2009/07/l07003
[34] Krumm J, Rouhana D (2013) Placer: semantic place labels from diary data. In:
Mattern F, Santini S, Canny JF, Langheinrich M, Rekimoto J (eds) UbiComp,
ACM, pp 163–172, URLhttp://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/huc/
ubicomp2013.html#KrummR13
[35] Laurila JK, Gatica-Perez D, Aad I, Blom J, Bornet O, Do T, Dousse O, Eberle J,
Miettinen M (2012) The mobile data challenge: Big data for mobile computing
research. Newcastle, UK
[36] Lu X, Bengtsson L, Holme P (2012) Predictability of population displacement
after the 2010 haiti earthquake. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 109(29):11,576–11,581, DOI 10.1073/pnas.1203882109, URL http://
44
www.pnas.org/content/109/29/11576.abstract, http://www.
pnas.org/content/109/29/11576.full.pdf+html
[37] Nikulin MS (2002) Hellinger distance. Encyclopaedia of Mathematics Kluwer
Academic Publishers
[38] Noulas A, Scellato S, Lambiotte R, Pontil M, Mascolo C (2012) A tale
of many cities: Universal patterns in human urban mobility. PLoS ONE
7(5):e37,027, DOI 10.1371/journal.pone.0037027, URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0037027
[39] Onnela JP, Saramaki J, Hyvonen J, Szabo G, Lazer D, Kaski K, Kertesz J,
Barabasi AL (2006) Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication net-
works. URL doi:10.1073/pnas.0610245104
[40] OpenStreetMap (2015) The OpenStreetMap Wiki. http://wiki.
openstreetmap.org, ” c⃝OpenStreetMap contributors”
[41] Paldino S, Bojic I, Sobolevsky S, Ratti C, Gonz´alez MC (2015) Urban magnetism
through the lens of geo-tagged photography. arXiv preprint arXiv:150305502
[42] Paraskevopoulos P, Dinh T, Dashdorj Z, Palpanas T, Seraﬁni L (2013) Identiﬁca-
tion and characterization of human behavior patterns from mobile phone data. In:
Intl.Conf. the Analysis of Mobile Phone Datasets (NetMob 2013), Special Ses-
sion on the Data for Development (D4D) Challenge, URL http://perso.
uclouvain.be/vincent.blondel/netmob/2013/D4D-book.pdf
[43] Pastor-Escuredo D, Morales-Guzm ´an A, Torres-Fern´andez Y , Bauer J, Wadhwa
A, Castro-Correa C, Romanoff L, Lee JG, Rutherford A, Fr´ıas-Mart´ınez V , Oliver
N, Fr´ıas-Mart´ınez E, Luengo-Oroz MA (2014) Flooding through the lens of mo-
bile phone activity. CoRR abs/1411.6574, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1411.6574
[44] Pei T, Sobolevsky S, Ratti C, Shaw SL, Li T, Zhou C (2014) A new insight into
land use classiﬁcation based on aggregated mobile phone data. International Jour-
nal of Geographical Information Science (V olume 28, Issue 9):1–20
[45] Phithakkitnukoon S, Horanont T, Di Lorenzo G, Shibasaki R, Ratti C (2010)
Activity-aware map: identifying human daily activity pattern using mobile phone
data. In: the Proc. of the 1st Intl. Conf. Human Behavior Understanding, pp 14–25
[46] Phithakkitnukoon S, Leong TW, Smoreda Z, Olivier P (2012) Weather effects on
mobile social interactions: A case study of mobile phone users in lisbon, portugal.
45
PLoS ONE 7(10):e45,745, DOI 10.1371/journal.pone.0045745, URL http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0045745
[47] Porta S, Latora V , Wang F, Rueda S, Strano E, Scellato S, Cardillo A, Belli
E, rdenas FC, Cormenzana B, Latora L (2012) Street centrality and the lo-
cation of economic activities in barcelona. Urban Studies 49(7):1471–1488,
URL http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:sae:urbstu:v:49:
y:2012:i:7:p:1471-1488
[48] Ratti C, Williams S, Frenchman D, Pulselli R (2006) Mobile landscapes: Using
location data from cell phones for urban analysis. Environment and planning B
33(5):727
[49] Ratti C, Sobolevsky S, Calabrese F, Andris C, Reades J, Martino M, Claxton
R, Strogatz SH (2010) Redrawing the map of great britain from a network of
human interactions. PLoS ONE 5(12), DOI 10.1371/journal.pone.0014248, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0014248
[50] Riboni D, Bettini C (2009) Context-aware activity recognition through a com-
bination of ontological and statistical reasoning. In: Zhang D, Portmann M,
Tan AH, Indulska J (eds) Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol 5585, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp 39–
53, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-02830-4 5, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-02830-4_5
[51] Sagl G, Resch B (2014) Mobile phones as ubiquitous social and environmental
geo-sensors. Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior, pp.pending Hershey PA,
USA: IGI Global.
[52] Sagl G, Beinat E, Resch B, Blaschke T (2011) Integrated geo-sensing: A case
study on the relationships between weather and mobile phone usage in northern
italy. In: IEEE International Conference on Spatial Data Mining and Geographi-
cal Knowledge Services, ICSDM 2011, Fuzhou, China, June 29 - July 1, 2011, pp
208–213, DOI 10.1109/ICSDM.2011.5969033, URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ICSDM.2011.5969033
[53] Sagl G, Blaschke T, Beinat E, Resch B (2012) Ubiquitous geo-sensing for
context-aware analysis: Exploring relationships between environmental and
human dynamics. Sensors 12(7):9800–9822, DOI 10.3390/s120709800, URL
http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/12/7/9800
46
[54] Sakaki T, Okazaki M, Matsuo Y (2010) Earthquake shakes twitter users: Real-
time event detection by social sensors. In: In Proceedings of the Nineteenth In-
ternational WWW Conference (WWW2010). ACM
[55] Salton G, Buckley C (1988) Term-weighting approaches in au-
tomatic text retrieval. Inf Process Manage 24(5):513–523, DOI
10.1016/0306-4573(88)90021-0, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0306-4573(88)90021-0
[56] Santi P, Resta G, Szell M, Sobolevsky S, Strogatz SH, Ratti C (2014) Quantifying
the beneﬁts of vehicle pooling with shareability networks. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111(37):13,290–13,294
[57] Sengstock C, Gertz M (2011) Exploration and comparison of geographic informa-
tion sources using distance statistics. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSPA-
TIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Sys-
tems, ACM, New York, NY , USA, GIS ’11, pp 329–338, DOI 10.1145/2093973.
2094017, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2093973.2094017
[58] Sengstock C, Gertz M, Flatow F, Abdelhaq H (2013) A probablistic model for
spatio-temporal signal extraction from social media. In: Proceedings of the 21st
ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Infor-
mation Systems, ACM, New York, NY , USA, SIGSPATIAL’13, pp 274–283,
DOI 10.1145/2525314.2525353, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
2525314.2525353
[59] Smith C, Mashhadi A, Capra L (2012) Ubiquitous sensing for mapping poverty
in developing countries
[60] Sobolevsky S, Szell M, Campari R, Couronn ´e T, Smoreda Z, Ratti C (2013) De-
lineating geographical regions with networks of human interactions in an exten-
sive set of countries. PloS one 8(12):e81,707
[61] Sobolevsky S, Sitko I, Combes RTD, Hawelka B, Arias JM, Ratti C (2014) Money
on the move: Big data of bank card transactions as the new proxy for human mo-
bility patterns and regional delineation. the case of residents and foreign visitors
in spain. In: Big Data (BigData Congress), 2014 IEEE International Congress on,
IEEE, pp 136–143
[62] Sobolevsky S, Sitko I, Grauwin S, des Combes RT, Hawelka B, Arias JM, Ratti
C (2014) Mining urban performance: Scale-independent classiﬁcation of cities
based on individual economic transactions. CoRR abs/1405.4301
47
[63] Sohn T, Varshavsky A, LaMarca A, Chen MY , Choudhury T, Smith I, Consolvo
S, Hightower J, Griswold WG, de Lara E (2006) Mobility detection using ev-
eryday gsm traces. In: 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp), Irvine, CA
[64] Song C, Qu Z, Blumm N, Barab ´asi AL (2010) Limits of predictability in human
mobility. Science 327(5968):1018–1021, DOI 10.1126/science.1177170,
URL http://www.barabasilab.com/pubs/CCNR-ALB_
Publications/201002-19_Science-Predictability/
201002-19_Science-Predictability.pdf, http://www.
sciencemag.org/cgi/reprint/327/5968/1018.pdf
[65] Wang Q, Taylor JE (2014) Quantifying human mobility perturbation
and resilience in hurricane sandy. PLoS ONE 9(11):e112,608, DOI
10.1371/journal.pone.0112608, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%
2Fjournal.pone.0112608
[66] Wesolowski A, Eagle N, Tatem AJ, Smith DL, Noor AM, Snow RW, Buckee
CO (2012) Quantifying the Impact of Human Mobility on Malaria. Science
338(6104):267–270, DOI 10.1126/science.1223467, URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/science.1223467
[67] Ye M, Shou D, Lee WC, Yin P, Janowicz K (2011) On the semantic annotation
of places in location-based social networks. In: Proceedings of the 17th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
ACM, New York, NY , USA, KDD ’11, pp 520–528, DOI 10.1145/2020408.
2020491, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2020408.2020491
[68] Yin Z, Cao L, Han J, Zhai C, Huang T (2011) Geographical topic discov-
ery and comparison. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference
on World Wide Web, ACM, New York, NY , USA, WWW ’11, pp 247–256,
DOI 10.1145/1963405.1963443, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1963405.1963443
48