1 
 
Title 
Insula Interoception, Active Inference and Feeling Representation 
 
Authors 
Alan S. R. Fermin1*, Shigeto Yamawaki1, Karl Friston2 
 
Affiliation  
1 Center for Brain, Mind and Kansei Sciences Research, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, 
Japan 
2 The Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
London, England. 
*Correspondence: fermin@hiroshima-u.ac.jp 
 
Keywords 
Insula, Active Inference, Interoception, Metaception, Mesaception, Feelings, Deep Brain. 
 
Abstract 
The body sends interoceptive visceral information through deep brain structures to the cerebral 
cortex. The insula cortex, organized in hierarchical modules, is the major cortical region 
receiving interoceptive afferents and contains visceral topographic maps. Yet, the biological 
significance of the insula’s modular architecture in relation to deep brain regions remains 
unsolved. In this opinion, we propose the Insula Hierarchical Modular Adaptive Interoception 
Control (IMAC) model to suggest that insula modules (granular, dysgranular and agranular 
subregions), forming networks with prefrontal (supplementary motor area, dorsolateral and 
ventromedial cortices) and striatum (posterior, dorsomedial and ventromedial) subregions, are 
specialized for higher-order interoceptive representations, recruited in a context-dependent 
manner to support habitual, model-based and exploratory adaptive behavior. We then discuss 
how insula interoceptive representations, or metaceptions, could give rise to conscious 
interoceptive feelings built up from low-order visceral representations and associated basic 
emotions located in deep interoceptive brain structures. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Introduction 
The human brain is composed of various specialized brain regions for processing diverse 
functions such as problem-solving, decision-making, memory, motivation, inhibitory control, 
emotion, motor control, social, sensory, and somatosensory processing [1]. Recent studies have 
sought to understand the role of interoceptive visceral physiological processes under the control 
of the autonomic nervous system (ANS), in human behavior and disease [2-7]. The ANS is 
responsible for transmitting interoceptive information to the brain from visceral organs that serve 
to maintain body survival functions, including the gastrointestinal system, heart, lungs, liver, 
kidneys, thermoregulatory, hormonal, and immune systems [3, 4]. However, the functions for 
which cortical brain regions receiving interoceptive afferents are specialized and when such 
functions are recruited for interoceptive control remain unknown. 
 
In the brain, the insular cortex is the main target of interoceptive afferents [3, 5, 8-11]. This 
central position of the insular cortex in processing interoceptive information has led to influential 
hypotheses on its potential roles in interoceptive prediction [9], information integration for 
awareness [12, 13] and interoceptive inference [14]. Despite the elegance and appeal of these 
hypotheses, no one has yet explained how insular functions are modulated by input from cortical 
and subcortical systems and whether such interactions maintain survival functions of the body. In 
this opinion we advance the Insula Hierarchical Modular Adaptive Interoception Control 
(IMAC) model to propose that the hierarchical organization of the insular cortex, supported by 
its multiple parallel networks with the prefrontal cortex (PFC), striatum, dopaminergic system, 
and autonomic nervous system, function in context-dependent control and learning of 
interoceptive responses, and in higher-order representation of conscious interoceptive feelings, 
built upon basic emotions and associated visceral processes. 
 
This opinion starts with a brief review of basic neural pathways that connect the brain to visceral 
organs, and to the hormonal and immune systems, followed by a description of the modular 
cytoarchitectonic organization of the insular cortex and its parallel neuroanatomical networks 
with the cerebral cortex, striatum, and dopaminergic system. We then introduce the IMAC model 
and discuss how it explains interoceptive adaptive behavior and gives rise to higher-order 
representations, and possibly to conscious feelings. We conclude by identifying directions in 
which the concepts proposed by the IMAC model may be used to understand interoceptive 
3 
 
dysfunctions observed in multiple psychiatric conditions, such as depression, addictive disorders, 
anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and schizophrenia. 
 
Main Text 
Body-Brain Interoceptive Pathways 
The pathways of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and parasympathetic nervous system 
(PNS) of the ANS convey afferent information about the physiological state of the body and 
visceral organs to the brain, and efferent central control signals to modify the activity of visceral 
systems [3, 4] (Figure 1). Interoceptive information also reaches the brain through the vascular 
system that transport all sorts of metabolites and signaling molecules, including nutrients, stress 
hormones, and immune substances, such as cytokines and prostaglandins [3, 15, 16]. 
 
 
Figure 1. (a) Basic organization of the neural pathways linking the parasympathetic and 
sympathetic autonomic nervous systems to the central nervous system and the effects of their 
activations on visceral functions. (b) Schematic diagram of the parasympathetic and sympathetic 
afferent interoceptive neural pathways and their connections. In the parasympathetic scheme, the 
dashed line linking the viscera to the gINS represents circulatory (e.g. arteries, blood) 
interoceptive information. Abbreviations: gINS (granular insula), THA (thalamus), PBN 
(parabrachial nucleus), HYP (hypothalamus), PAG (periaqueductal gray), NTS (nucleus tractus 
solitarius), CV (cardiovascular reticular nuclei), RC (respiratory reticular center), VGN (vagus 
nerve), GPN (glossopharyngeal nerve), SPC (spinal cord). 
 
 

4 
 
Efferent pathways of both the SNS and PNS are organized in a two-neuron chain, the pre-
ganglionic neurons that project to post-ganglionic neurons that synapse directly with their target 
visceral organs [3, 4]. Pre-ganglionic neurons receive input from the insular cortex and 
subcortical brain regions (e.g. amygdala, hypothalamus), and from brain stem systems including 
the reticular cardiovascular and respiratory nuclei [3, 4]. Cell bodies of PNS pre-ganglionic 
neurons are located in four main brain stem nuclei, the Edinger-Westphal nucleus (involved in 
pupil constriction), the salivatory nuclei (control lacrimal glands, salivary glands, and 
secretomotor glands of nasal and oral mucosa), the dorsal vagal nucleus (involved gut mobility 
and nutrient osmosis) and the nucleus ambiguus (innervates visceral organs and throat 
structures). PNS pre-ganglionic neurons project to post-ganglionic neurons via the cranial 
nerves, chiefly the glossopharyngeal (CN IX) and vagus (CN X) nerves [3, 4]. In contrast, the 
bodies of SNS pre-ganglionic neurons form viscerotopic maps located in the intermediolateral 
cell columns of the spinal cord, and project to their target post-ganglionic neurons located in the 
preaortic and sympathetic ganglia [3, 4]. 
 
Pre-ganglionic and post-ganglionic PNS neurons and pre-ganglionic SNS neurons release 
acetylcholine, whereas SNS post-ganglionic neurons that innervate smooth muscles release 
acetylcholine and SNS post-ganglionic neurons that innervate cardiac cells release 
noradrenaline3, 4. Acetylcholine binds to cholinergic and muscarinic receptors, and noradrenaline 
binds to four types of adrenergic receptors (α1, α2, β1, β2) [3, 4]. SNS and PNS post-ganglionic 
neurons also release distinct combinations of neuropeptides (e.g., somatostatin, substance P, 
dynorphin), forming a neurochemical code, specific to each target visceral organ, that modulates 
the speed and duration of visceral responses [3, 4, 17]. Activation of the SNS and PNS can exert 
antagonistic or synergistic influences, depending on the target visceral organs in question (See 
Figure 1A for examples of SNS and PNS influences on their visceral targets). An example of an 
antagonistic interaction is that SNS stimulation leads to pupil dilation and accelerates heart rate, 
but PNS stimulation leads to pupil constriction and decreases heart rate. In contrast, activation of 
both SNS and PNS act synergistically to increase secretion of lacrimal and salivary glands [3, 4]. 
 
Afferent ANS pathways transmit sensory information to the brain via nerve fibers connected to 
ANS efferent pathways [3, 4]. Most visceral information, such as glucose levels, blood 
oxygenation and osmolarity, heart contraction, and lung inflation and deflation, reaches the brain 
5 
 
through the vagus nerve, 80% of which is composed of sensory fibers, whereas the SNS 
transmits information related to visceral pain [3, 4]. While cell bodies of SNS afferent neurons 
are located in the dorsal roots of the spinal cord, cell bodies of PNS afferent neurons are located 
in cranial sensory ganglia (Figure 1B) [3, 4]. After reaching the brain stem, SNS afferents 
synapse at the trigeminal nucleus (TGN) and from there to the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), 
parabrachial nucleus (PBN), and periaqueductal gray (PAG). Then from these systems, 
interoceptive sensory information is passed to the thalamus and finally reaches the insular cortex. 
Interoceptive afferent fibers travelling through the vagus nerve synapse at the NTS, and from 
there to the PBN, PAG, and hypothalamus, before arriving at the insular cortex, passing through 
the thalamus [3, 4]. 
 
Insula hierarchical organization 
A series of neuroanatomical virus tracing studies in monkeys and humans have identified three 
main insula sub-regions based on the existence of a cellular layer IV containing predominantly 
granular cells: the agranular insula (aINS), located in a ventral anterior position and lacking layer 
IV; the granular insula (gINS), located in the most dorsal posterior position, with a fully 
developed layer IV, and the dysgranular insula (dINS), located between the aINS and gINS, but 
with an underdeveloped layer IV [18-20]. 
 
Insular sub-regions are organized hierarchically, with reciprocal connections between the gINS 
and dINS and between the dINS and aINS, and modest aINS fiber output to the gINS [18-20]. 
Another feature that characterizes the insular cortex is the progressive reduction of muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors (rACh) along its ventral anterior to dorsal posterior axis, with a higher 
density of rACh in the aINS and a lower density in the gINS [18-20]. 
 
Insula-visceral and somatic maps 
In monkeys, for example, vestibular, nociceptive, thermoreceptive, visceral, and gustatory 
information is represented in the insular cortex in a posterior to anterior direction [8]. 
Stimulation studies in humans have shown a topographic interoceptive representation of pain, 
thermal, somatosensory, visceral, and gustatory information located in a posterior to mid-insular 
direction [21]. In contrast, somatosensory information is represented all over the insular cortex 
[22, 23]. 
6 
 
 
Insula-cortical connections 
Cortical regions involved in primary sensory (somatosensory and auditory cortices), motor 
(primary, supplementary and pre-supplementary motor areas) and environmental information 
processing (superior and inferior parietal cortices) project predominantly to the gINS [8, 24]. It is 
important to note here that the inferior parietal cortex contains the supramarginal and angular 
gyri that form the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), a cortical complex implicated in social 
cognition [25-27]. The dINS, on the other hand, receives anatomical input from the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex (Brodmann areas 45 and 46) [18-20, 28]. In contrast, the aINS makes 
connections predominantly with ACC, ventromedial orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala and 
hippocampal complex [8, 18-20]. Neuroimaging studies also show a topographic representation 
of emotional, motivational, cognitive, and viscero-motor information processing onto the insular 
cortex [29-34]. 
 
Insula-striatum-dopaminergic connections 
The aINS makes connections primarily with the ventral striatum (vStriatum), the dINS with the 
dorsomedial striatum (mStriatum), and the gINS with the dorsolateral posterior striatum 
(pStriatum) [35]. Striatum sub-regions also receive topographical input from the dopaminergic 
system, with the vStriatum receiving its main dopaminergic input from the ventral tegmental area 
(VTA), and the mStriatum and pStriatum from the medial and ventro-lateral substantia nigra 
complex, respectively [36]. 
 
Striatum direct and indirect output pathways project to thalamic nuclei before reaching the 
insular cortex [37]. The medium spiny neurons (MSN) of striatum direct and indirect projection 
pathways express D1 or D2 dopamine receptors, respectively [38]. Both direct and indirect 
pathways project to the internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars 
compacta before reaching thalamic nuclei, however, the indirect pathway projects first to the 
external segment of the globus pallidus and the subthalamic nuclei [37, 38]. 
 
Insula Hierarchical Modular Adaptive Interoception Control (IMAC) Model 
According to active inference, the brain uses internal generative models, acquired through 
experience, and extraction of the statistical distribution of sensory input, to continuously generate 
7 
 
hypothetical predictions of expected sensory data [39-41]. In active inference, the goal of the 
agent is to find optimal policies that minimize free-energy, or prediction errors, between 
predictions of expected and actual sensory input generated by the agent’s interactions with the 
environment [42, 43]. Based on active inference, the IMAC model hypothesizes that the 
hierarchical modular cytoarchitecture of the insular cortex, supported by its parallel neural 
networks with the PFC and striatum-dopaminergic systems, is specialized in higher-order 
interoceptive inference, hereby called metaception. That is, it specializes in formation of cortical 
interoceptive representations of lower-order innate interoceptive representations, hereby called 
mesaception, located in subcortical (e.g. amygdala, hypothalamus) and brain stem nuclei (e.g. 
reticular nuclei). In this framework, metaception is regarded as an evolved cortical capacity to 
generate higher-order interoceptive predictions that occur concurrently with action predictions 
that seek to maximize an individual’s long-term fitness in his or her interactions with the 
environment. The main premise of the IMAC model is that adaptive behavior of animals and 
humans revolves around acquisition of behavioral policies, not only for stimulus-action mapping, 
but also for concurrent generation and learning of interoceptive responses associated with them. 
 
Interoceptive sensory information first reaches the gINS, and is then forwarded to the dINS, and 
from the dINS to the aINS. In contrast, backward descending connections propagate information 
from the aINS through the dINS and back to the gINS. These forward and backward connections 
endow the insular cortex with a neuroanatomical architecture specialized for predictive coding, 
where backward connections generate and convey interoceptive predictions, and forward 
connections generate and convey interoceptive prediction errors [44, 45]. In this hierarchical 
insular architecture, the gINS represents the lowest level of the hierarchy, the dINS is at an 
intermediate level and the aINS sits atop the hierarchy. The gINS is in a position to generate low-
order interoceptive predictions and to compute interoceptive prediction errors by comparing 
those predictions with real-time interoceptive afferents from the ANS. The dINS generates 
intermediate-order interoceptive predictions and computes interoceptive prediction errors based 
on forward signals arriving from the gINS. Finally, the aINS generates higher-order interoceptive 
predictions and interoceptive prediction errors by computing the difference between its 
predictions and the forward signals arriving from the dINS. 
 
Adaptive Interoception in Insula-Prefrontal-Striatum Networks 
8 
 
The mechanism elaborated above is not entirely new, as previous works have already proposed 
how active inference may be used for interoceptive inference [9, 14]. The IMAC model, 
however, suggests that the insular interoceptive predictive functions can be better understood 
considering the parallel connections of the insular cortex with PFC sub-regions, namely the 
dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC), the ventromedial PFC (VMPFC), the supplementary motor area 
(SMA), and the striatum-dopaminergic system (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. (a) Parallel neural networks linking the insula, prefrontal cortex and striatum. In the 
IMAC model, the PFC, insula, striatum and dopaminergic systems are specialized for distinct 
functions related to adaptive interoceptive inference, namely, interoceptive introspection, 
interoceptive inference, interoceptive selection and interoceptive precision, respectively. The 
insula-PFC-striatum parallel networks are hierarchically organized as follows: the lower level 
comprises the gINS-SMA-pStr network specialized for storage and quick generation habit-like 
interoceptive predictions; the mid-level comprises the dINS-DLPFC-mStr network specialized 
for model-based interoceptive predictions; and the highest level comprises the aINS-VMPFC-
vStr network specialized for interoceptive exploration. Other neural, including the cerebellum, 
hippocampus and amygdala, provide additional functions to the interoceptive predictions of these 
networks, such as sequential interoceptive predictions, episodic interoception, and Pavlovian 
interoceptive conditioning, respectively. (b) Schematic representation of the neuroanatomical 
location of the main structures involved in adaptive interoceptive inference according to the 
IMAC model. Abbreviations:  SMA (supplementary motor area), DLPFC (dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex), VMPFC (ventromedial prefrontal cortex), ACC (anterior cingulate cortex), gINS 
(granular insula), dINS (dysgranular insula), aINS (agranular insula), pStr (posterior striatum), 
mStr (dorsomedial striatum), vStr (ventral striatum), eGP (external globus pallidus), iGP 
(internal globus pallidus), THA (thalamus), vlSN (ventrolateral substantia nigra complex), mSN 
(medial substantia nigra complex), VTA (ventral tegmental area), HYP (hypothalamus), NTS 
(nucleus tractus solitarius), D1 and D2 (dopamine receptors). 
 

9 
 
 
The PFC and striatum sub-regions form anatomical parallel loops specialized for processes 
implicated in adaptive decision making and behavioral control [37, 46-51]. The VMPFC-
vStriatum and DLPFC-mStriatum loops are recruited in early stages of learning, when behavior 
is erratic, guided by external reward signals and require attention, but their activities diminish as 
learning progresses and behavior becomes automatic, fast, and less error-prone [46, 50-51]. 
Distinct neuroanatomical components of the anterior PFC and VMPFC-vStriatum loop are also 
implicated in novel learning by means of exploration [52-54], whereas the DLPFC-mStriatum 
loop implements a model-based, decision-making strategy to predict future outcomes of 
hypothetical actions [53, 55-57]. In contrast, activity of the SMA-pStriatum loop increases after 
repeated experiences, when behaviors become habitual.  The SMA-pStriatum loop is implicated 
in sequential motor memory [46, 50, 51, 53]. 
 
The IMAC model hypothesizes that the metaceptive functions of the insular modules follows 
similar functional specializations as those observed in PFC-striatum loops. The posterior gINS, 
which forms a network with the SMA and pStriatum, is specialized for generating habitual 
interoceptive predictions using visceral-based representations. According to this view, the 
posterior gINS stores interoceptive memories, which can be readily used as interoceptive 
policies, especially in well-learned environmental situations, for fast generation of interoceptive 
predictions that control interoceptive responses. A selected gINS interoception policy is 
evaluated by dopaminergic precision signals arriving from the ventro-lateral SN complex and 
indicating the degree of confidence of the gINS in generating appropriate interoceptive 
predictions. 
 
There are environmental demands, however, for which gINS interoceptive policies may be 
ineffective, eventually generating large interoceptive prediction errors. These gINS low-order 
interoceptive prediction errors are then passed forward and recruit metaception functions of the 
immediate insular module in the hierarchy, the dINS. The IMAC model hypothesizes that the 
dINS, as part of the DLPFC-dmStriatum loop, is specialized for model-based interoceptive 
predictions of interoceptive states that may be needed in future action states. Furthermore, dINS 
model-based interoceptive predictions may have a biological purpose to initiate allostatic 
interoceptive responses that adjust the functioning of visceral systems even before future action 
10 
 
states or actual physiological disturbances take place [7]. A model-based strategy, however, has 
its limitations, given that it may actually be infeasible, due to high computational cost and time 
constraints, to predict all possible consequences of hypothetical actions and environmental state 
transitions. Conversely, a crucial advantage to the use of a model-based strategy is that it can 
significantly accelerate learning of novel behaviors [53, 56]. In the case of interoceptive 
behavior, hastening interoceptive learning in model-based adaptive behavior can be vital for 
acquisition and maintenance of interoceptive responses that are critical for survival. 
 
Humans and animals constantly face novel situations that require learning of entirely novel 
behaviors, especially when old behaviors prove suboptimal and inefficient, or when internal 
models are outdated and unreliable. Recent evidence demonstrated that exploratory behavior, 
implemented in the VMPFC-vStriatum network, can be an alternative solution to support 
adaptive behavior in situations in which the SMA-pStriatum and DLPFC-dmStriatum fail to 
generate optimal behavioral policies [53, 56]. The IMAC model hypothesizes that the 
metaceptive function of the aINS, as part of the VMPFC-vStriatum network, is specialized for 
interoceptive predictions that support concurrent mapping of interoceptive responses to novel 
actions that proved successful in exploratory adaptive behavior. When model-based interoceptive 
predictions by the dINS fail, its interoceptive prediction error signals, modulated by 
dopaminergic precision signals in the medial SN complex, are sent forward to the aINS, which is 
then recruited to become dominant in exploratory, model-free behavior to support learning of 
novel interoceptive-state mappings 
 
Striatum, Dopamine, and Acetylcholine in Interoceptive Control 
Acetylcholine increases synaptic transmission in the thalamus, hippocampus, and PFC, making 
the activity of neurons in these regions more responsive to synaptic input from other brain areas, 
and facilitating learning of novel information [58-60]. The IMAC model hypothesizes that the 
higher density of acetylcholine receptors in the aINS and dINS endows these regions with greater 
capability to flexibly modify their metaceptive functions for interoceptive prediction and to 
create novel interoceptive mappings. In contrast, activity of the gINS can an exert direct 
influence on visceral interoceptive functions, such as generation of cardiac arrhythmias [61, 62]. 
The IMAC model hypothesizes that the lower density of acetylcholine receptors in the posterior 
11 
 
gINS provides stability for interoceptive predictions that directly impact visceral survival 
functions. 
 
The striatum has strong bidirectional connections with the dopaminergic system [36, 63]. The 
function of dopaminergic neurons is associated with value-based learning and signaling rewards, 
aversive cues, and alerting signals [64-66]. Striatal direct and indirect pathways have been 
implicated in facilitation vs inhibition of actions [67, 68], learning good vs bad values [69], and 
reward vs aversive learning, respectively [70]. Recent evidence, however, suggests that the direct 
and indirect pathways do not follow an on-off activation pattern, but rather a concurrent control 
of desirable and undesirable actions [71, 72]. In the context of active inference, the striatum is 
responsible for the selection of cortical representations based on precision signals computed by 
dopaminergic neurons [42]. The IMAC model hypothesizes that dopaminergic input onto the 
striatum serves to signal the precision or goodness of predictions arriving from the insular cortex, 
whereas the direct and indirect pathways are concurrently engaged in the selection of 
interoceptive responses that promote survival and suppression of responses that may cause harm. 
 
Stages of Insula Interoception Prediction Learning 
As described above, adaptive motor behavior goes through stages of learning and transitions of 
control in the brain [46, 50, 51, 53]. Similarly, the IMAC model hypothesizes that the aINS and 
dINS effect interoceptive predictions in early stages of learning that require exploratory or 
model-based interoceptive strategies, respectively, whereas the posterior gINS is recruited for 
interoceptive predictions once interoceptive behaviors have become habitual after repeated 
experiences. However, there are situations when learning by exploratory behavior is needed, but 
may eventually require learning of simple interoceptive responses. In such situations, it may be 
inefficient and life-threatening to use a more complex and time-consuming dINS model-based 
interoceptive strategy. The IMAC model hypothesizes that direct anatomical input from the aINS 
onto the gINS serves as an efficient neural pathway for fast learning of novel, but simple 
interoceptive predictions, such as in Pavlovian conditioning, which may support maintenance of 
visceral survival functions. 
 
Insula Feeling Representation 
12 
 
In the IMAC framework elaborated above, two new terms have been proposed, metaception and 
mesaception, to explain how interoceptive predictions and interoceptive prediction errors give 
rise to neural representations of innate emotions and conscious feelings. Subcortical and brain 
stem systems store neural representations of unlearned motivational drives that are capable of 
generating innate behavioral repertoires (e.g., consummatory, approach, aggression) and 
automatic physiological reactions to interoceptive signals arriving from visceral organs [3, 4, 73-
75]. Interestingly, innate behavioral repertoires are often associated with physiological responses 
and basic emotions, such as fear, anger, hunger, disgust, happiness, and surprise [75]. Thus, 
mesaceptions (or first-order representations) are interoceptive predictions computed in 
subcortical brain regions (e.g., amygdala, hypothalamus) and in brain stem nuclei (e.g., reticular 
nuclei, PAG, PBN) that give rise to basic emotions. For example, low glucose and insulin 
afferent signals onto brain stem systems activate a mesaceptive representation of hunger, and 
they trigger homeostatic responses and food-specific consumption behaviors through a 
specialized neural pathway within the hypothalamus [74, 76]. The hypothalamus has specialized 
survival systems involved in interoceptive processing that may give rise to other mesaceptions 
involved not only in emotions related to feeding, but also in emotions related to drinking, sex, 
aggression, fear, thermoregulation, and neural immunity [74]. 
 
Metaceptions or second-order interoceptive representations in the IMAC model, are higher-order 
cortical representations of mesaceptions, and they may generate conscious feelings brought about 
by visceral afferent signals and the basic emotions associated with them. Metaceptions may not 
only transform basic emotions such as fear and hunger into conscious feelings, but may also 
support the generalization of basic emotions into more complex emotional processes, such as 
social fear, embarrassment, pride, alertness, guilt, and grief. However, despite previous 
suggestions that that multiple cortical regions, including the insular cortex, contribute to the 
generation of conscious feelings [77-79], the specific role that these brain regions play in 
feelings remains elusive. The IMAC model offers a specific hypothesis that conscious feelings 
represented in the insular cortex are built from visceral signals and the innate emotions and 
behavior repertoires associated with them. Furthermore, based on the PFC-striatum networks in 
which each insula module participates, the IMAC model suggests that even within the insular 
cortex there may be different levels of feeling representation. The posterior gINS may generate 
implicit or habitual metaceptions commonly associated with “gut” or intuitive feelings, in 
13 
 
contrast to the dINS and aINS that may contribute to representations of actual conscious or 
abstract interoceptive feelings.  
 
The IMAC model suggests that metaceptions may initiate allostasis, that is, the anticipatory 
generation of interoceptive visceral responses to predicted future bodily and environmental 
demands7. However, a novel contribution of the IMAC model is the extension of the allostasis 
concept to suggest that metaceptions also have the capacity to generate feelings and modify 
interoceptive states when individuals replay past experiences, imagine hypothetical situations, 
empathize with others, and empathize with internal motivational states of others. For example, 
the insular cortex seems to possess mirror-neuron like functions that support empathetic behavior 
and understanding of others’ feelings, which are then associated with physiological responses, 
such as crying when observing others crying, crying in grief, imagery of one’s own and others’ 
body sensations, and yawn contagiousness [80-84]. Furthermore, insula function is associated 
with music-induced feelings, art aesthetic judgment, interoceptive imagery, and retrieval of 
highly arousal, aversive, or disgusting experiences that have induced physiological changes [85-
88]. 
 
The hierarchical organization of interoceptive feeling representation mapped onto the modular 
architecture of the insular cortex resembles the neuroanatomical and functional hierarchical 
organization of cognitive processes mapped onto the PFC and striatum [89, 90]. Functions of the 
PFC have also been associated with other forms of higher-order cognition, such introspection 
and reasoning [91]. Furthermore, stimulation studies in humans and animals have revealed that 
the SMA, DLPFC and VMPFC can induce physiological responses [92-94]. Based on the latter 
findings, the IMAC model hypothesizes that the PFC forms a third-order interoception 
representation and uses introspection to inspect and elaborate on the contents, causes, and 
consequences of second-order interoceptive representations of the insular cortex.  
 
Other brain interoception systems 
Several other brain regions may support the use of insular interoceptive representations to other 
domains (Figure 2). The DLPFC, which is also implicated in categorical learning [95, 96], may 
contribute to interoceptive introspection using categorical interoceptive information, such as 
heart rate, hunger level, or visceral pain. The hippocampus, implicated in episodic memory [97], 
14 
 
may contribute to formation of episodic interoceptive memories and also to model-based 
interoceptive control [98]. The amygdala, implicated in Pavlovian conditioning [75], is 
connected with the aINS and may contribute to Pavlovian interoceptive learning. The neural 
architecture of the cerebellum has been implicated in computing forward models and 
encapsulation of learned sensory-motor mappings [48]. Distinct components of the cerebellar 
nuclei and vermis that function in visceral control and form loop connections with the SMA [99, 
100], could store interoceptive forward models of sequential visceral responses. 
 
 
Figure 3. (a) Common view of interoceptive information flow ascending from visceral systems 
to subcortical regions and insular cortex and back to visceral systems. In this view, subcortical 
systems work as pattern generators and emit control signals to achieve homeostatic balance of set 
points.  (b) The IMAC model proposes a hierarchical architecture where forward connections 
(red arrows) transmit interoceptive prediction errors and backward connections (blue arrows) 
generate interoceptive predictions of desired interoceptive states. In this hierarchical 
interoceptive architecture, deep brain systems (subcortical and brain stem areas) contain 
mesaceptions or 1st order representations of interoceptive information; the insular cortex contains 
metaceptions or 2nd order representations of mesaceptions; and the PFC contains 3rd order 
representations of interoceptive signals and implements introspection to guide adaptive 
interoceptive behaviors and estimate the meaning, causes and consequences of interoceptive 
prediction errors.  (see Main Text for more details). 
 
 

15 
 
Concluding Remarks 
In this opinion, we applied the active inference framework to propose an Insula Hierarchical 
Modular Adaptive Interoception Control (IMAC) model in an attempt to explain how the 
hierarchical modular organization of the insular cortex helps to form higher-order cortical 
interoceptive representations, adaptive interoceptive control, and interoceptive feelings. The 
IMAC framework contrasts with a view that takes for granted that unaltered interoceptive 
afferents reaching the central nervous system. The main contributions of the IMAC model can be 
summarized as four main points, as follows. Parallel networks linking the insular cortex with the 
PFC and striatum are specialized for hierarchical generation of interoceptive policies that map 
interoceptive predictions to particular behaviors in an experience-dependent manner. Second, the 
IMAC model suggests that dopamine emits precision signals regarding the goodness of insular 
interoceptive predictions and supports interoceptive predictions that support life and suppresses 
those that are harmful to the maintenance of visceral functions. Third, acetylcholine is 
hypothesized to support flexibility in formation of novel interoceptive mappings by the dINS and 
aINS, and maintains stability in the gINS of interoceptive predictions implicated in maintenance 
of visceral survival functions. Last, the IMAC model introduces two novel concepts, metaception 
and mesaception, to dissociate functions of interoceptive representations in the insular and 
subcortical / brain stem systems (Figure 3). 
 
Altogether, the IMAC model takes a network approach to explain how higher-order interoceptive 
predictions, computed in the hierarchical modular organization of the insular cortex, give rise to 
conscious feelings built up from basic innate emotions represented in subcortical and brain stem 
systems. Future work is needed to test the predictions made by the IMAC model, as well as to 
test how disturbances in different components of the model, including metaceptions and 
mesaceptions, contribute to social anxiety and stress and lead to development of somatic and 
interoceptive dysfunctions observed in multiple neurological disorders, such as depression, or 
addictive or post-traumatic stress disorders. 
 
Acknowledgments 
A. F and S. Y. are grateful for research support provided to S. Y. by the Japan Agency for 
Medical Research and Development (AMED), Grant No. JP19dm0107093, and the COI 
16 
 
STREAM program from the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Grant No. 
JPMJCE1311. 
 
Competing Interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 
 
 
References 
1. Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., & Jessell, T. M. Principles of neural science. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, Health Professions Division (2000). 
2. Porges, S. W. The polyvagal theory: Neurophysiological foundations of emotions, 
attachment, communication, and self-regulation. New York etc: Norton (2011). 
3. Jänig, W. The integrative action of the autonomic nervous system: Neurobiology of 
homeostasis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2008). 
4. Wilson, P. L., Stewart, P. A., & Akesson, E. J. Autonomic nerves: Basic science, clinical 
aspects, case studies. Philadelphia: B.C. Decker (1997). 
5. Llewellyn-Smith, I. J., & Verberne, A. J. M. Central regulation of autonomic functions. 
New York: Oxford University Press (2011). 
6. Uylings, H. B. M. Cognition, emotion and autonomic responses: The integrative role of the 
prefrontal cortex and limbic structures. Amsterdam: Elsevier (2000). 
7. Sterling, P. What is health? Allostasis and the evolution of human design. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: The MIT Press (2020). 
8. Nieuwenhuys, R. The insular cortex: A review. Progress in Brain Research, 195, 123-164 
(2012). 
9. Barrett, L. F. & Simmons, W. K. Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 16, 419-429 (2015). 
10. Critchley, H. D. & Harrison, N. A. Visceral Influences on Brain and Behavior. Neuron, 77, 
624-638 (2013). 
11. Thayer, J. F. & Sternberg, E. M. Neural aspects of immunomodulation: Focus on the vagus 
nerve. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 24, 1223-1228 (2010). 
12. Craig, A.D. How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the 
body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 655–666 (2002). 
13. Craig, A. D. How do you feel — now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 10, 59-70 (2009). 
17 
 
14. Seth, A. K. & Friston, K. J. Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain. 
Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences, 371, 1708, 1-10 (2016). 
15. McEwen, B. S. Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation: central role of the 
brain. Physiological reviews, 87, 873-904 (2007). 
16. Banks, W. A., & Erickson, M. A. The blood–brain barrier and immune function and 
dysfunction. Neurobiology of disease, 37, 26-32 (2010). 
17. Gibbins, I. L. Peripheral autonomic nervous system. In The human nervous system (pp. 93-
123). Academic Press New York (1990). 
18. Mesulam, M. M., & Mufson, E. J. Insula of the old world monkey. I. Architectonics in the 
insulo-orbito-temporal component of the paralimbic brain. The Journal of Comparative 
Neurology, 212, 1-22 (1982). 
19. Mufson, E. J., & Mesulam, M. M. Insula of the old world monkey. II: Afferent cortical 
input and comments on the claustrum. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 212, 23-37 
(1982). 
20. Mesulam, M.-M., & Mufson, E. J. Insula of the old world monkey. III: Efferent cortical 
output and comments on function. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 212, 38-52 
(1982). 
21. Stephani, C., Fernandez-Baca, V. G., Maciunas, R., Koubeissi, M., & Lüders, H. O. 
Functional neuroanatomy of the insular lobe. Brain Structure & Function, 216, 137-49 
(2011). 
22. Penfield, W., & Faulk, M. E. The insula: Further observations on its function. Londres 
(1955). 
23. Pugnaghi, M., Meletti, S., Castana, L., Francione, S., Nobili, L., Mai, R., & Tassi, L. 
Features of somatosensory manifestations induced by intracranial electrical stimulations of 
the human insula. Clinical Neurophysiology, 122, 2049-2058 (2011). 
24. Narayana, S., Laird, A. R., Tandon, N., Franklin, C., Lancaster, J. L., & Fox, P. T. 
Electrophysiological and functional connectivity of the human supplementary motor 
area. Neuroimage, 62, 250-265 (2012). 
25. Santiesteban, I., Banissy, M. J., Catmur, C., & Bird, G. Enhancing social ability by 
stimulating right temporoparietal junction. Current Biology, 22, 2274-2277 (2012). 
26. Silani, G., Lamm, C., Ruff, C. C., & Singer, T. Right supramarginal gyrus is crucial to 
overcome emotional egocentricity bias in social judgments. Journal of neuroscience, 33, 
15466-15476 (2013). 
27. Carter, R. M., & Huettel, S. A. A nexus model of the temporal–parietal junction. Trends in 
cognitive sciences, 17, 328-336 (2013). 
28. Seltzer, B., & Pandya, D. N. Post‐rolandic cortical projections of the superior temporal 
sulcus in the rhesus monkey. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 312, 625-640 (1991). 
29. Mutschler, I., Wieckhorst, B., Kowalevski, S., Derix, J., Wentlandt, J., Schulze-Bonhage, 
A., & Ball, T. Functional organization of the human anterior insular cortex. Neuroscience 
letters, 457, 66-70 (2009). 
18 
 
30. Nomi, J. S., Schettini, E., Broce, I., Dick, A. S., & Uddin, L. Q. Structural connections of 
functionally defined human insular subdivisions. Cerebral Cortex, 28, 3445-3456 (2018). 
31. Kurth, F., Zilles, K., Fox, P. T., Laird, A. R., & Eickhoff, S. B. A link between the systems: 
functional differentiation and integration within the human insula revealed by meta-
analysis. Brain Structure and Function, 214, 519-534 (2010). 
32. Kurth, F., Eickhoff, S. B., Schleicher, A., Hoemke, L., Zilles, K., & Amunts, K. 
Cytoarchitecture and probabilistic maps of the human posterior insular cortex. Cerebral 
Cortex, 20, 1448-1461 (2010). 
33. Cerliani, L. et al. Probabilistic tractography recovers a rostrocaudal trajectory of 
connectivity variability in the human insular cortex. Human brain mapping, 33, 2005-2034 
(2012). 
34. Tanaka, S. C., Doya, K., Okada, G., Ueda, K., Okamoto, Y., & Yamawaki, S. Prediction of 
immediate and future rewards differentially recruits cortico-basal ganglia loops. Nature 
neuroscience, 7, 887-893 (2004). 
35. Chikama, M., McFarland, N. R., Amaral, D. G., & Haber, S. N. Insular cortical projections 
to functional regions of the striatum correlate with cortical cytoarchitectonic organization 
in the primate. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 9686-9705 (1997). 
36. Haber, S. N., Fudge, J. L., & McFarland, N. R. Striatonigrostriatal pathways in primates 
form an ascending spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral striatum. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 20, 2369-2382 (2000). 
37. Alexander, G. E., DeLong, M. R., & Strick, P. L. Parallel organization of functionally 
segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annual review of neuroscience, 9, 357-
381 (1986). 
38. Calabresi, P., Picconi, B., Tozzi, A., Ghiglieri, V., & Di Filippo, M. Direct and indirect 
pathways of basal ganglia: a critical reappraisal. Nature neuroscience, 17, 1022 (2014). 
39. Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. A free energy principle for the brain. Journal of 
Physiology-Paris, 100, 70-87 (2006). 
40. Friston, K. Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS computational biology, 4(11) (2008). 
41. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?. Nature reviews 
neuroscience, 11, 127-138 (2010). 
42. Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., & Dolan, R. J. 
The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 7, 
598 (2013). 
43. Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., & Kiebel, S. J. Reinforcement learning or active 
inference?. PloS one, 4(7) (2009). 
44. Rao, R. P., & Ballard, D. H. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional 
interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature neuroscience, 2, 79-87 
(1999). 
45. Rao, R. P., & Sejnowski, T. J. Predictive Coding, Cortical Feedback, and Spike-Timing 
Dependent Plasticity. Probabilistic models of the brain, 297 (2002). 
19 
 
46. Hikosaka, O. et al. Parallel neural networks for learning sequential procedures. Trends in 
neurosciences, 22, 464-471 (1999). 
47. Hikosaka, O., Ghazizadeh, A., Griggs, W., & Amita, H. Parallel basal ganglia circuits for 
decision making. Journal of Neural Transmission, 125, 515-529 (2018). 
48. Doya, K. What are the computations of the cerebellum, the basal ganglia and the cerebral 
cortex?. Neural networks, 12, 961-974 (1999). 
49. Belin, D., Jonkman, S., Dickinson, A., Robbins, T. W., & Everitt, B. J. Parallel and 
interactive learning processes within the basal ganglia: relevance for the understanding of 
addiction. Behavioural brain research, 199, 89-102 (2009). 
50. Jueptner, M., Stephan, K. M., Frith, C. D., Brooks, D. J., Frackowiak, R. S., & Passingham, 
R. E. Anatomy of motor learning. I. Frontal cortex and attention to action. Journal of 
neurophysiology, 77, 1313-1324 (1997). 
51. Jueptner, M., Frith, C. D., Brooks, D. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Passingham, R. E. 
Anatomy of motor learning. II. Subcortical structures and learning by trial and 
error. Journal of neurophysiology, 77, 1325-1337 (1997). 
52. Valentin, V. V., Dickinson, A., & O'Doherty, J. P. Determining the neural substrates of 
goal-directed learning in the human brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 4019-4026 (2007). 
53. Fermin, A. S., Yoshida, T., Yoshimoto, J., Ito, M., Tanaka, S. C., & Doya, K. Model-based 
action planning involves cortico-cerebellar and basal ganglia networks. Scientific reports, 
6, 31378 (2016). 
54. Daw, N. D., O'doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., & Dolan, R. J. Cortical substrates for 
exploratory decisions in humans. Nature, 441, 876-879 (2006). 
55. Daw, N. D., Niv, Y., & Dayan, P. Uncertainty-based competition between prefrontal and 
dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control. Nature neuroscience, 8, 1704-1711 
(2005). 
56. Gläscher, J., Daw, N., Dayan, P., & O'Doherty, J. P. States versus rewards: dissociable 
neural prediction error signals underlying model-based and model-free reinforcement 
learning. Neuron, 66, 585-595 (2010). 
57. Wunderlich, K., Dayan, P., & Dolan, R. J. Mapping value based planning and extensively 
trained choice in the human brain. Nature neuroscience, 15, 786 (2012). 
58. Hasselmo, M. E., & Schnell, E. Laminar selectivity of the cholinergic suppression of 
synaptic transmission in rat hippocampal region CA1: computational modeling and brain 
slice physiology. Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 3898-3914 (1994). 
59. Hasselmo, M. E. The role of acetylcholine in learning and memory. Current opinion in 
neurobiology, 16, 710-715 (2006). 
60. Hasselmo, M. E., & Sarter, M. Modes and models of forebrain cholinergic 
neuromodulation of cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36, 52-73 (2011). 
61. Chouchou, F. et al. How the insula speaks to the heart: Cardiac responses to insular 
stimulation in humans. Human Brain Mapping, 40, 2611-2622 (2019). 
20 
 
62. Oppenheimer, S. M., Wilson, J. X., Guiraudon, C., & Cechetto, D. F. Insular cortex 
stimulation produces lethal cardiac arrhythmias: a mechanism of sudden death? Brain 
research, 550, 115-121 (1991). 
63. Watabe-Uchida, M., Zhu, L., Ogawa, S. K., Vamanrao, A., & Uchida, N. Whole-brain 
mapping of direct inputs to midbrain dopamine neurons. Neuron, 74, 858-873 (2012). 
64. Matsumoto, M., & Hikosaka, O. Two types of dopamine neuron distinctly convey positive 
and negative motivational signals. Nature, 459, 837-841 (2009). 
65. Bromberg-Martin, E. S., Matsumoto, M., & Hikosaka, O. Dopamine in motivational 
control: rewarding, aversive, and alerting. Neuron, 68, 815-834 (2010). 
66. Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. 
Science, 275, 1593-1599 (1997). 
67. Hikosaka, O., Takikawa, Y., & Kawagoe, R. Role of the basal ganglia in the control of 
purposive saccadic eye movements. Physiological reviews, 80, 953-978 (2000). 
68. Alexander, G. E., & Crutcher, M. D. Functional architecture of basal ganglia circuits: 
neural substrates of parallel processing. Trends in neurosciences, 13, 266-271 (1990). 
69. Hikosaka, O. et al. Direct and indirect pathways for choosing objects and actions. 
European Journal of Neuroscience, 49, 637-645 (2019). 
70. Soares-Cunha, C., Coimbra, B., Sousa, N., & Rodrigues, A. J. Reappraising striatal D1-and 
D2-neurons in reward and aversion. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 68, 370-386 
(2016). 
71. Jin, X., Tecuapetla, F., & Costa, R. M. Basal ganglia subcircuits distinctively encode the 
parsing and concatenation of action sequences. Nature neuroscience, 17, 423-430 (2014). 
72. Tecuapetla, F., Jin, X., Lima, S. Q., & Costa, R. M. Complementary contributions of 
striatal projection pathways to action initiation and execution. Cell, 166, 703-715 (2016). 
73. Johansen, J. P., Cain, C. K., Ostroff, L. E., & LeDoux, J. E. Molecular Mechanisms of Fear 
Learning and Memory. Cell, 147, 509-524 (2011). 
74. Sternson, S. M. Hypothalamic Survival Circuits: Blueprints for Purposive 
Behaviors. Neuron, 77, 810-824 (2013). 
75. LeDoux, J. Rethinking the Emotional Brain. Neuron, 73, 1052-1052 (2012). 
76. Gerozissis, K. Brain insulin, energy and glucose homeostasis; genes, environment and 
metabolic pathologies. European journal of pharmacology, 585, 38-49 (2008). 
77. Johnston, E., & Olson, L. The feeling brain: The biology and psychology of emotions. WW 
Norton & Company (2015). 
78. Damasio, A. R. et al. Subcortical and cortical brain activity during the feeling of self-
generated emotions. Nature neuroscience, 3, 1049-1056 (2000). 
79. Damasio, A., & Carvalho, G. B. The nature of feelings: evolutionary and neurobiological 
origins. Nature reviews neuroscience, 14, 143-152 (2013). 
80. Kowalski, S. D., & Bondmass, M. D. Physiological and psychological symptoms of grief in 
widows. Research in nursing & health, 31, 23-30 (2008). 
21 
 
81. Kanel, D., Al-Wasity, S., Stefanov, K., & Pollick, F. E. Empathy to emotional voices and 
the use of real-time fMRI to enhance activation of the anterior insula. NeuroImage, 198, 
53-62 (2019). 
82. Lucas, M. V., Anderson, L. C., Bolling, D. Z., Pelphrey, K. A., & Kaiser, M. D. 
Dissociating the neural correlates of experiencing and imagining affective touch. Cerebral 
Cortex, 25, 2623-2630 (2015). 
83. Björnsdotter, M., & Olausson, H. Vicarious responses to social touch in posterior insular 
cortex are tuned to pleasant caressing speeds. Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 9554-9562 
(2011). 
84. Haker, H., Kawohl, W., Herwig, U., & Rössler, W. Mirror neuron activity during 
contagious yawning - an fMRI study. Brain imaging and behavior, 7, 28-34. (2013). 
85. Koelsch, S. Brain correlates of music-evoked emotions. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 15, 
170-180 (2014). 
86. Brown, S., Gao, X., Tisdelle, L., Eickhoff, S. B., & Liotti, M. Naturalizing aesthetics: brain 
areas for aesthetic appraisal across sensory modalities. Neuroimage, 58, 250-258 (2011). 
87. Smith, A. P., Henson, R. N., Rugg, M. D., & Dolan, R. J. Modulation of retrieval 
processing reflects accuracy of emotional source memory. Learning & Memory, 12, 472-
479 (2005). 
88. Fossati, P. et al. Distributed self in episodic memory: neural correlates of successful 
retrieval of self-encoded positive and negative personality traits. Neuroimage, 22, 1596-
1604 (2004). 
89. Koechlin, E., Ody, C., & Kouneiher, F. The architecture of cognitive control in the human 
prefrontal cortex. Science, 302, 1181-1185 (2003). 
90. Ito, M., & Doya, K. Multiple representations and algorithms for reinforcement learning in 
the cortico-basal ganglia circuit. Current opinion in neurobiology, 21, 368-373 (2011). 
91. Fleming, S. M., Weil, R. S., Nagy, Z., Dolan, R. J., & Rees, G. Relating introspective 
accuracy to individual differences in brain structure. Science, 329, 1541-1543 (2010). 
92. Smittenaar, P., Prichard, G., FitzGerald, T. H., Diedrichsen, J., & Dolan, R. J. Transcranial 
direct current stimulation of right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex does not affect model-based 
or model-free reinforcement learning in humans. PLoS One, 9(1) (2014). 
93. Wong, S. W., Massé, N., Kimmerly, D. S., Menon, R. S., & Shoemaker, J. K. Ventral 
medial prefrontal cortex and cardiovagal control in conscious humans. Neuroimage, 35, 
698-708 (2007). 
94. Erdogan, E. T., Saydam, S. S., Kurt, A., & Karamursel, S. Anodal transcranial direct 
current stimulation of the motor cortex in healthy volunteers. Neurophysiology, 50, 124-
130 (2018). 
95. Pan, X., Sawa, K., Tsuda, I., Tsukada, M., & Sakagami, M. Reward prediction based on 
stimulus categorization in primate lateral prefrontal cortex. Nature neuroscience, 11, 703 
(2008). 
22 
 
96. Rees, G., Frackowiak, R., & Frith, C. Two modulatory effects of attention that mediate 
object categorization in human cortex. Science, 275, 835-838 (1997). 
97. Dolan, R. J., & Fletcher, P. C. Dissociating prefrontal and hippocampal function in 
episodic memory encoding. Nature, 388, 582-585 (1997). 
98. Vikbladh, O. M. et al. Hippocampal contributions to model-based planning and spatial 
memory. Neuron, 102, 683-693 (2019). 
99. Akkal, D., Dum, R. P., & Strick, P. L. Supplementary motor area and presupplementary 
motor area: targets of basal ganglia and cerebellar output. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 
10659-10673 (2007). 
100. Coffman, K. A., Dum, R. P., & Strick, P. L. Cerebellar vermis is a target of projections 
from the motor areas in the cerebral cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 108, 16068-16073 (2011). 
 