A computational theory for the production
of limb movements
Short title: Optimal motor control
Emmanuel Guigon (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4506-701X)
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique, ISIR, F-
75005 Paris, France
Corresponding author:
Emmanuel Guigon
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique, ISIR
Pyramide Tour 55 - Boîte Courier 173 - 4 Place Jussieu,75252 Paris Cedex 05, France
Tel: 33 1 44276382 / Fax: 33 1 44275145 / Email: emmanuel.guigon@sorbonne-universite.fr
Author Note: The ideas in this article are inspired from a preceding article (Guigon et al.,
2019), but none of the material presented here has been presented in a symposium or a
meeting, nor posted on preprint server. The author declares no competing financial interests.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not
exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without
authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI:
10.1037/rev0000323
1
Abstract
Motor control is a fundamental process that underlies all voluntary behavioral responses.
Several different theories based on different principles (task dynamics, equilibrium-point
theory, passive-motion paradigm, active inference, optimal control) account for specific
aspects of how actions are produced, but fail to provide a unified view on this problem. Here
we propose a concise theory of motor control based on three principles: optimal feedback
control, control with a receding time horizon, and task representation by a series of via-points
updated at fixed frequency. By construction, the theory provides a suitable solution to the
degrees-of-freedom problem, i.e. trajectory formation in the presence of redundancies and
noise. We show through computer simulations that the theory also explains the production of
discrete, continuous, rhythmic and temporally-constrained movements, and their parametric
and statistical properties (scaling laws, power laws, speed/accuracy tradeoffs). The theory has
no free parameters and only limited variations in its implementation details and in the nature
of noise are necessary to guarantee its explanatory power.
Keywords: modeling, motor control, optimality, variability, time
2
Introduction
Action is the only mean by which the nervous system can communicate evolutions of its
internal states to the external world. In any case and irrespective of any theoretical construct,
to produce a faint smile, a friendly handshake or a full running pattern, a voluntary (as
opposed to a reflex) process should be triggered to create an appropriate temporal pattern of
coordination directed to specific muscular groups (Lashley, 1951; Bernstein, 1967). Each and
everyone could agree on this statement, yet there is no consensus on the nature of this process
(not to say on its anatomical and physiological bases; Arber & Costa, 2018). Although formal
debates on this issue has long since disappeared from the literature (Feldman & Levin, 1995;
Kelso, 1995; Turvey, 1977; but for some recent revivals, see Friston, 2011; Huys, Perdikis, &
Jirsa, 2014; Mohan, Bhat, & Morasso, 2019), one is still confronted with the same recurring
and embarrassing questions when addressing motor control: Are there internal
representations in the brain? Does one part of the brain act as a controller which enslaves
other parts of the brain and the body? Does the brain manipulate position or force variables?
In this framework, a central issue is as follows: how not to keep contemplating and
discussing these difficulties, and make progress in the field of motor control modeling that
could be beneficial for understanding movement disorders, improving rehabilitation devices
or inspiring human-like robotics?
The goal of this article is to describe a computational theory1 for the production of
limb movement that resolves or circumvents part of these difficulties. The starting point is a
recent study of velocity fluctuations during slow movements (Guigon, Chafik, Jarrassé, &
Roby-Brami, 2019). This study shows that a slow movement (with a mean speed below 10
1 The term "computational" is used to designate a class of models based on the theory of
control (including optimal control) and internal models (Todorov & Jordan, 2002; Wolpert &
Ghahramani, 2000). Detailed reading of Todorov and Jordan (2002) is an important
prerequisite to understand the present article.
3
cm/s) is well described by a time series of constant-duration (~0.13 s), elementary, discrete
displacements whose amplitude is proportional to mean movement speed2. The central
observation is that the temporal structure of movement kinematics is invariant with changes
in movement speed, consistent with the landmark study of Vallbo and Wessberg (1993). The
study proposes a model to explain how slow movements are produced: a regular staircase
goal position signal at ~8 Hz is pursued by an optimal feedback controller with a temporal
horizon of 0.28 s3. To visualize the process, imagine that you try to reach a virtual target that
jumps to a different place every 1/8 s and that your strategy is to assume that at each time the
target is stationary and should be reached smoothly in 0.28 s. The resulting movement will be
a series of aborted smooth segments of 1/8 s whose velocity is proportional to the size of
jumps. The model suggests a general theoretical account of motor control in terms of goals
intermittently updated at this frequency and optimally pursued at this horizon. According to
the model, any fluctuation observed in a kinematic signal (diversely called submovement,
segment, unit, pulse, ...) should be considered a consequence of the pursuit of a temporary
goal4. Here, a theory is derived on this basis in terms of three computational principles, and is
shown to explain a broad range of motor phenomena: trajectory formation in discrete (point-
to-point), continuous (drawing, handwriting), rhythmic and temporally-constrained tasks,
ubiquity of isochronous behaviors, scaling laws, power laws and speed-accuracy tradeoffs.
The article is organized in four parts. First, we outline the context of this study. Next, we
2 An illustrative representation is a regular temporal staircase signal with speed-dependent
stair height.
3 The notions of elementary displacement and temporal horizon are not ambiguous. They
emerge from processing and model-based description of experimental data (Guigon et al.,
2019). Yet the reported values (0.13 s for the duration of elementary displacements, 0.28 s for
the temporal horizon) are not universal as they were obtained from data analysis and depend
on the choice of a cutoff frequency for low-pass filtering.
4 Important notions related to submovement and intermittency are introduced and
comprehensively discussed in Guigon et al. (2019).
4
present our computational theory of motor control, and a set of simulations that illustrate its
main characteristics. Finally, we provide a thorough discussion of the results and the theory.
Context
The computational approach
The computational approach to motor control5 is prototypically represented by the stochastic
optimal feedback control (SOFC) theory of Todorov and Jordan (2002) which has reached a
wide audience due to its conciseness, scope and explanatory power (Diedrichsen, Shadmehr,
& Ivry, 2010; Scott, 2004). This theory provides a principled solution to the problem of
motor coordination (Bernstein’s degrees-of-freedom problem), i.e. how redundant degrees of
freedom at each level of the motor hierarchy (from neural space to task space) are
coordinated to produce goal-directed actions, and accounts for many characteristics of motor
acts (trajectories, structured variability, synergy formation, ...) as by-products of its
principles.
SOFC came on top of fifty years of research that elaborated on the application of
control, optimal control and optimal estimation theory to the description of human motor
behaviors (Baron & Kleinman, 1969; Flash & Hogan, 1985; Hatze, 1976; Harris & Wolpert,
1998; Hoff, 1994; Hogan, 1984; Nelson, 1983; Uno, Kawato, & Suzuki, 1989; Wolpert,
Ghahramani, & Jordan, 1995). It contained not only a synthesis of previous proposals but
also several new ideas on the nature of motor control. First, it abolished the long-held but
embarrassing dichotomy between feedforward and feedback control, and replaced it by a
more representative control/estimation architecture6. Second, it proposed to resolve
5 See Discussion for a presentation of debates on motor control.
6 In traditional control architectures, a feedforward controller generates an open-loop control
signal (e.g. to follow a desired trajectory) and a feedback controller (e.g. a reflex) corrects
5
redundancy on a moment-by-moment basis and simultaneously for all the available degrees
of freedom (from neural space to task space). Third it gave a central, instrumental role to
signal-dependent motor noise (multiplicative noise on motor commands; Harris & Wolpert,
1998; Jones, Hamilton, & Wolpert, 2002; Todorov, 2002) in the emergence of a "minimum
intervention principle" according to which "deviations from the average trajectory are
corrected only when they interfere with task performance" (Todorov & Jordan, 2002). A
likely consequence of this principle is the emergence of structured patterns of variability in
which a large variability in the contribution of individual degrees of freedom from trial to
trial can accompany a low goal-related variability (Bernstein’s idea of "repetition without
repetition"; concept of uncontrolled manifold; Scholz & Schöner, 1999).
Limitations
Despite its successes, SOFC is plagued by several limitations, four of them being quite
revealing. First, it comes with a heavy computational burden all the more so that a specific
controller must be built for each task at hand. For instance, a via-point experiment (e.g.
Experiment 1 in Todorov & Jordan, 2002) would require a dedicated controller for every
possible configuration of the via-points. The burden results from the formulation of the
model in terms of a Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) controller in which the task
representation is embedded into the cost function. This approach blurs the distinction
between skilled and unskilled actions, and leaves no room for multiple, eventually
deviations due to perturbations (Schaal, Ijspeert, & Billard, 2003). Based on arguments
drawn from observations on task variability and goal-directed motor corrections, Todorov
and Jordan (2002) rejected these architectures and proposed a control scheme in which a
feedforward command is elaborated at each time from feedback information (actual and
predicted sensory inputs). The combination of feedforward and feedback control offers no
room for open-loop control since control is recalculated at each time based on feedback
information.
6
suboptimal strategies which can exist to solve a motor task (Ganesh, Haruno, Kawato, &
Burdet, 2010; Kodl, Ganesh, & Burdet, 2011).
Second, as the task representation is embedded into the cost function, LQG runs
several objectives in parallel (e.g. find a solution of lowest energy expenditure possible and
the closest possible to a goal), and makes compromises between the objectives. Parameters
are needed to weight the different objectives which are not easy to identify experimentally
(how one would trade energetic expenditure for accuracy, or positional accuracy for velocity
accuracy?), if they ever exist.
Third, as the time to achieve a goal is chosen in advance and decreases gradually as
the goal draws nearer, continuous motor behaviors (e.g. tracking, drawing, writing,
scribbling, …) and flexible adjustments following perturbations (Liu & Todorov, 2007;
Shadmehr & Mussa-Ivaldi, 1994) are not properly explained in this framework. Ad hoc
online updating of time is feasible (Liu & Todorov, 2007), but lacks an underlying principle.
In fact, time representation is a deep and ubiquitous issue. Considering again a via-point
experiment, not only the overall task duration must be chosen, but also the time to reach each
via-point. Experimental studies have shown that the temporal organization of reaching
through via-points obeys to an isochrony principle, i.e. the transit time between successive
points is almost constant (Flash & Hogan, 1985; Kodl, Ganesh, & Burdet, 2011). Isochrony is
a venerable concept corresponding to a compensatory regulation of movement speed with
amplitude to maintain movement duration approximately constant (Binet & Courtier, 1893;
Bryan, 1892; Denier van der Gon & Thuring, 1965; Glencross, 1975; Lacquaniti, Terzuolo,
& Viviani, 1983; Viviani & McCollum, 1983). The origin of isochrony is unknown7 and has
been rarely addressed in computational studies (Flash & Hogan, 1985; Flash, Meirovitch, &
Barliya, 2013; Saito, Tsubone, & Wada, 2006). Incomplete compensation can be explained in
7 Note that isochrony is found in models using classical feedback control and in related
models (e.g. Bullock & Grossberg, 1988).
7
optimal control models by a cost of time (Harris & Wolpert, 2006; Hoff, 1994; Shadmehr,
Orban de Xivry, Xu-Wilson, & Shih, 2010). Yet, in these models, complete compensation
and strict temporal invariance (isochrony) are irrational and would require an infinite
contribution of the cost of time.
Fourth, SOFC (and in fact all optimal control models) produces smooth movements of
any duration whereas the smoothness of experimentally recorded movements decreases with
increasing movement duration (Salmond, Davidson, & Charles, 2017; Shmuelof, Krakauer,
& Mazzoni, 2012; review in Guigon et al., 2019). The discrepancy is due to the intrinsically
time-invariant nature of optimal trajectories generated by the models. In the same vein,
optimal control provides no account for movement intermittency (Doeringer & Hogan, 1998;
Guigon et al., 2019; Vallbo & Wessberg, 1993), and the constant rate of peak velocity, peak
acceleration and peak jerk in motor behaviors (Guigon et al., 2019; Shmuelof et al., 2012;
Vallbo & Wessberg, 1993).
Three computational principles
Three principles are proposed to exploit the power of the computational approach (Todorov
& Jordan, 2002), and overcome the above-mentioned limitations. They are derived from
experimental and theoretical observations on slow movements which suggest that a motor
task is represented by a time series of goals updated at a fixed frequency and optimally
pursued at a fixed horizon (Guigon et al., 2019). The principles are described in the
framework of control theory. Motor control is considered as a control problem in which the
behavior of a controlled object is governed by a controller through a control policy and a set
of goals to achieve. The 3 principles are the following:
8
The control policy is a "universal" optimal feedback control
policy
An optimal feedback control (OFC) policy is a function that takes as input the best estimated
state of the controlled object (as given by an optimal state estimator), a goal state and a time
to reach the goal, and provides the best control (relative to a cost function) that drives the
controlled object to the goal in the given time (Bryson & Ho, 1975). In the most general
(nonlinear, continuous-time) setting, an OFC policy ! ! to reach a goal !!(!) (which is a
function of time since it can change at any time) can be formally written at each time !
! ! = !(!),
where ! is the function defined in !,!(!) by
!(!)
! !! = !"#$%& ! ! ! ,!′ ! !" (Equation 1)
!!
!
for a dynamics of the controlled object given by
! ! = ! ! ! ,! ! +! ! , (Equation 2)
!"#
where ! is the state of the controlled object8 (italic is used for scalars, bold italic for vectors,
and bold for matrices, dot is for time derivative), ! the time to reach the goal (which is
considered a function of time; see below for the choice of !), ! the dynamics of the object,
! a noise on the dynamics, and ! a cost function. Boundary conditions are given by
!"#
! ! = ! ! ,
and
! ! !(!) ,!! ! = 0, (Equation 3)
8 The state of the object corresponds to the smallest possible subset of variables that are
necessary to describe the behavior of the object (e.g. position, velocity, ...).
9
where ! is a function that specifies the final boundary conditions9, and the best estimated
state ! is defined by
! ! = ! ! ! ,! ! +! ! ! ! −!! ! , Equation 4
where ! is the Kalman gain, ! the observation matrix, and
! ! = !! ! +! ! , (Equation 5)
!"#
where ! is an observation noise term (see Stengel, 1984 for a mathematical description of
!"#
optimal estimation and Kalman filtering). Equations 1 to 5 define an architecture that belongs
to the class of control/estimation architectures (Figure 1A; Todorov, 2004). The fact that
!!(!) is a function of time does not mean that it prescribes a "desired trajectory". The actual
trajectory corresponding to !!(!) is not !!(!), but a concatenation of pieces of trajectory
produced by the control policy to reach !!(!) at each time !.
In this formulation, the control policy (Equation 1) is deterministic and is the same
irrespective of the task at hand, i.e. it is aware of the task only through constraints that set the
goals (boundary conditions !!(!); Equation 3) to achieve for this task. Such a control policy
is called "universal" to indicate that it is a general purpose process independent of any
specific task, without any other connotations. In order to justify this choice, we must prove
that this formulation has the same explanatory power as the stochastic formulation used by
Todorov and Jordan (SOFC), and alleviates some limitations of SOFC.
Figure 1. Building the model. A. Control/estimation architecture corresponding
to Equations 1-5. B. Normalized boxcar function. C. Example of a step function.
Here, the update times are regularly spaced with step duration ! .
!"#$
9 A usual function ! is ! ! !(!) ,!! ! = ! !(!) −!! ! , but other functions can be
used as well. Equation 3 indicates that the goal !!(!) is a goal state, which means that a goal
can be possibly specified for every state variable (e.g. position, but also velocity, ...).
10
SOFC elaborates a stochastic control policy10 which is optimal with respect to the
statistics of the noise on the dynamics (Equation 2) and observation (Equation 5), based on
!(!)
! !! = !"#$%& ! ! ! ,!′ ! ,!(!) !"
!!
!
where ! is a set of parameters that specifies the task at hand, and the mathematical
expectation operator over noise. In this framework, the task is represented by an objective
(quantity to minimize) rather than by a constraint (condition to fulfill; Equation 3) (Nelson,
1983). Interestingly, the very mechanism which is responsible for the explanatory power of
SOFC (Todorov & Jordan, 2002) is not univoquely related to a formulation as an LQG
controller. The only requirements for the occurrence of the minimum intervention principle
(see explanation above) are the presence of signal-dependent motor noise and a properly
functioning optimal state estimator, irrespective of the stochastic or deterministic nature of
the controller, and the formulation in terms of objectives or constraints (Guigon, Baraduc, &
Desmurget, 2008b). More specifically, the fundamental observation that motor variability is
organized along redundant task dimensions (Scholz & Schöner, 1999; Figure 1 in Todorov &
Jordan, 2002) does not necessitate a full-blown formulation in terms of stochastic optimality.
The mathematical formulation of SOFC requires a strikingly large number of terms
(Equations 2 and 3 in Todorov & Jordan 2002, Supplementary Notes), but most of these
terms could be removed without qualitative consequences on the results reported by Todorov
and Jordan (Guigon et al., 2008b). Simulations have shown that a deterministic controller that
handles control-dependent objectives and state-dependent, task-related constraints separately
and a LQG controller account equally well for structured patterns of motor variability
(Guigon et al., 2008b). The main difference between the two approaches is the fact that, in
10 The distinction between stochastic and deterministic processes concerns only the control
policy. In all OFC formulations, optimal state estimation is present and stochastic by
construction.
11
the former case, the controller is not stochastic, i.e. it is unaware of the statistics of noise. In
fact, it remains to be proven that stochastic optimality is a necessary concept in motor
control.
The proposed formulation (Equations 1 to 5) alleviates two limitations of SOFC.
First, the computational burden of building a specific control policy for each task at hand is
replaced by the burden of building a unique universal policy which is not more complex than
any task specific policy11. Second, the parameters which are necessary to weight multiple
simultaneous objectives in SOFC are absent when constraints are used rather than objectives,
which eliminates extra parameters and extra rules to set them.
This discussion might appear uselessly technical. However, as long as principles are
concerned, it is important to address the efficiency and conciseness of theoretical constructs.
In practice, the two formulations discussed above have the same explanatory power.
The time to reach a goal is constant irrespective of the time
already spent for this goal
Except in highly specific laboratory conditions, neither the world nor the body should be
considered as stationary, e.g. due to noise and uncertainties, there is no such thing as a fixed
target or fixed posture. Accordingly there is no such thing as the onset, the middle or the end
of an action, but only an ongoing state that continuously evolves toward ever changing goals.
Temporal flexibility is necessary to account for these facts and is afforded by the function
!(!) (Equation 1). The typical choice !(!) = ! , where ! is a constant (finite fixed horizon),
! !
offers no flexibility as the remaining time to achieve a goal at each time ! is ! −! which
!
decreases gradually as time passes and the goal draws nearer. In this framework, different !
!
are used to obtain movements of different durations which leads to the possibility of smooth
11 The central problem of how an optimal control policy is built and stored by the nervous
system remains unsolved.
12
movements of any duration in contradiction with the fact that movement smoothness
decreases with increasing movement duration, and only the fastest movements are likely to
be smooth. An alternative choice is !(!) = ∞ (infinite horizon formulation; Qian, Jiang,
Jiang, & Mazzoni, 2013; Rigoux & Guigon, 2012). In this case, movement duration is an
emergent characteristic of optimal control, which provides a principled solution to the
problem of flexibility. Yet the problem of smoothness remains open. A third choice, retained
here as a principle, is !(!) = !+! , where ! is a constant (finite receding horizon), which
! !
provides a constant time ! to achieve a goal at each time (Berio, Calinon, & Fol Leymarie,
!
2017; Bye & Neilson, 2008, 2010; Guigon et al., 2019). We use the self-explanatory term
receding horizon for ! 12. In this case, the control policy becomes stationary (independent of
!
time), produces isochronous behaviors, and is intrinsically flexible as any novel goal is
automatically pursued at horizon ! . Allowing ! to vary would lead to the abovementioned
! !
problem of smoothness. The receding horizon is thus considered fixed, not only within a
movement, but in fact across all movements and tasks. The value of ! (0.28 s) was
!
identified in a study of slow movements (Guigon et al., 2019). The most important point is
not the value of ! by itself, but the fact that it must be considered a constant rather than an
!
open parameter. How movements of different durations are obtained in the framework of the
receding horizon is the object of the third principle (see below).
A task is defined by a sequence of goals played at a fixed and
unique frequency
A strong proposal of Todorov and Jordan is that motor behavior is based on the pursuit of
goals rather than tracking of prescribed trajectories. Accordingly, a task can be defined by a
discrete sequence of successive, non overlapping goal states (Equation 3), e.g. a sequence of
12 The concept of receding horizon belongs to the framework of model predictive control
(Garcia, Prett, & Morari, 1989). No technical information on this framework is needed to
understand the model.
13
via-points (Flash & Hogan, 1985; Kodl et al., 2011; Experiment 1 in Todorov & Jordan,
2002; Wada & Kawato, 1995). In this framework, the most general definition of a task is a
time series !!(!) of ! goal states !!, updated at times ! , given by
! !
!!!
!!(!) = !!boxcar(!,! ,! )+!!boxcar(!,! ,∞) (Equation 6)
! ! !!! ! !
!!!
for ! ∈ [! ,∞[, where boxcar(!,!,!) is the function which is 1 for ! ∈ [!,!] and 0 elsewhere
!
(Figure 1B; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boxcar_function). The boxcar function allows a
single goal to be selected at each time. We only consider time series with a constant time
interval called ! , i.e. ∀!,! −! = ! . The resulting time series !!(!) is a step
!"#$ !!! ! !"#$
function (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Step_function), where each step corresponds to a goal
that is pursued for a certain time (example in Figure 1C). The goal states are called via-points
except the last one which is called target. If any possible task is to be described by
Equation 6, a principle should be provided for the choice of goal states and update times
(value of ! ) for a given task. The proposed principle is based on observations on slow
!"#$
movements (Guigon et al., 2019), and is summarized in five rules:
- rule 1: if the task involves state-space constraints (e.g. spatial constraints), the goal states
are chosen to match the constraints. For instance, a tracking task would be represented by a
series of goals extracted from the trajectory to follow;
- rule 2: if there are no state-space constraints (e.g. scribbling), the goal states are chosen at
will;
- rule 3: if the task involves temporal constraints (e.g. follow the beat of metronome), the
update times are chosen to match the constraints (e.g. Figure 1C with ! = period of the
!"#$
metronome);
- rule 4: if there are no temporal constraints (e.g. scribbling), the goal states are updated with
a fixed period ! = 0.13 !, i.e. ! −! = ! (e.g. Figure 1C with ! = ! ).
! !!! ! ! !"#$ !
14
- rule 5: the presence of state-space and temporal constraints does not prevent from
considering additional goal states updated with period ! .
!
The central element of the proposed principle is in rule 4 which gives a unique recipe
to specify the time course of a motor act without a direct specification of its duration. The
actual duration is an emergent consequence of the interaction between ! and ! , and an
! !
increasing function of ! (number of goal states). The principle states that ! is the same
!
across all movements and tasks. The value of ! (0.13 s) was identified in Guigon et al.
!
(2019), to account for velocity fluctuations at ~8 Hz during slow movements. As for ! , the
!
most important point is not the value of ! by itself, but the fact that it must be considered a
!
constant rather than an open parameter (see Table 1 for a summary on time notations).
Note that when the goals are updated with the period ! and pursued at horizon !
! !
(which is longer than ! ), a goal may not be reached before the occurence of the next one.
!
In the LQG formulation used by Todorov and Jordan, the sequence of goals is
integrated in the cost function and the resulting trajectory corresponds to the best way to run
through the sequence. In the present approach, the sequence of goals is decided upstream of
actual control which allows for multiple, possibly suboptimal task representations.
Simulations
We present a set of simulations that obey to the three proposed principles. They attempt to
reproduce observed characteristics of motor behavior during different tasks. The architecture
of the model (Figure 1A) is the same for all the simulations, and the simulations differ only
by the sequence of goals used to describe the tasks (Figure 1C). The detailed functioning of
the model is the following. A simulation duration ∆ and a timestep of simulation ! are
chosen. At each time ! in [0,∆], a goal !!(!) and the estimated state ! ! are available and a
control policy ! ! is calculated over the interval !,!+! to reach the current goal (!!(!))
!
15
at time !+! starting from the estimated state at time ! (Equations 1 and 3). Then the new
!
state !(!+!) and new estimated state ! !+! at time !+! due to the control, observation
and noise at time ! are calculated from current state !(!) and current estimated state ! !
(Equations 2, 4 and 5). The process is repeated at time !+! and stopped when current time
is ∆. Note that the simulation duration ∆ defines the period of time during which the behavior
of the model is simulated and has no influence on this behavior. ∆ is chosen to cover the
duration of the sequence of goals (see Table 1 for a summary on time notations).
The principles do not specify a unique model. Some freedom remains on how
sequences of goals are built (in allocentric or egocentric coordinates) and on the nature of
constraints at each goal (e.g. position, velocity, force, ...). The possible variations of the
model are systematically tested.
There are no free parameters in the deterministic simulations and only noise
parameters in the stochastic simulations. The noise parameters are given with no justification
(the noise parameters not specified are 0), but a specific section (the last one) is dedicated to
the study of noise and variability.
Methods
One-dimensional inertial point
The three computational principles were applied to an inertial point actuated by a linear
muscle in the presence of noise, with a quadratic cost function, and a Kalman filter for
optimal state estimation. The rationale for this choice (in particular the absence of
redundancy) is the following. As the model inherits properties from the model of Todorov
and Jordan (2002), we deem it not necessary to address issues already considered in their
work (kinematic redundancy, muscular redundancy, formation of uncontrolled manifolds and
synergies).
16
The dynamics of the point was given by Equation 2, with the state vector ! =
[! ! ! !] (! position, ! velocity, ! muscular activation, ! muscular excitation), the control
vector ! = ! , and the vectorial function ! defined by
! = !
!! = !
!! = −!+!
!! = −!+!
where ! is the mass of the point and ! the muscle time constant. This formulation
corresponds to a linear, second-order (Newtonian) dynamics coupled to a linear, second-order
(low-pass filtering) force generator, and widely used in motor control models (Harris &
Wolpert, 1998; Todorov & Jordan, 2002; van der Helm & Rozendaal, 2000).
The cost function was defined by
! !,! = !!.
State estimation obeyed to Equation 4 and observation to Equation 5. The Kalman gain was
calculated following Guigon et al. (2008b) for sources of noise described below.
Task representation: series of goals and boundary conditions
A task was represented by a time series of goal states (Equation 6). There are two ways to
define a sequence. The next goal can be defined relative to the current goal or relative to the
current (estimated) state of the system. It corresponds broadly to the distinction between
allocentric and egocentric coding of goals. Thus we considered an absolute goal setting
policy when
!! = !! +! (Equation 7)
! !!! !
and a relative goal setting policy when
!! = ! ! +! , (Equation 8)
! ! !
where ! is an arbitrary sequence.
!
17
In the most general setting, final boundary conditions were defined by Equation 3.
The choice of function ! is a fundamental issue. For instance, different boundary conditions
should probably be used for discrete and continuous movements, e.g. it may not be necessary
or effective to impose a zero-velocity constraint at a via-point in a continuous movement. Yet
there is no self-evident principle for the choice of ! (e.g. what is an appropriate velocity
constraint at a via-point in a continuous movement?), and it is necessary to consider and test
different possibilities. There are two aspects in the construction of boundary conditions. First,
the states to be constrained are chosen, the remaining unconstrained states being
automatically determined by the optimal control process. For a 4 dimensional problem
(position, velocity, activation, excitation), there are 15 different configurations, but only three
were considered:
- the full-state constraint, i.e.
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
- the partial-position constraint, i.e.
! !+! −!! ! = 0 (Equation 9)
!
- the partial-position/velocity constraint, i.e.
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
! (Equation 10)
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
Second, in the full-state constraint, the desired values of the constrained states are chosen. It
is in general easy to set positional constraints (e.g. positions of via-points) and sometimes
possible to set velocity constraints (e.g. stationary via-points). For the other states, two
conservative methods were considered:
- a zero-value method (the states go to 0), e.g. when only the position goal is known
18
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
! !+! = 0
! (Equation 11)
! !+! = 0
!
! !+! = 0
!
or when the position and velocity goals are known
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
! (Equation 12)
! !+! = 0
!
! !+! = 0
!
- a current-value method (the states keep their current value), e.g. when only the position goal
is known
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!(!) = 0
! (Equation 13)
! !+! −!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!(!) = 0
!
or when the position and velocity goals are known
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!!(!) = 0
! (Equation 14)
! !+! −!(!) = 0
!
! !+! −!(!) = 0
!
This description of boundary constraints applied to the via-points (goal states 1 to !−1;
Equation 6). The target (goal state !; Equation 6) was considered as stationary and always
obeyed to Equation 11.
In summary, a task representation was defined by a series of goal, a goal setting
policy (absolute or relative), a boundary constraint (full-state, partial-position, partial-
position/velocity) and a boundary method for the full-state constraint (zero- or current-value).
It should be noticed that the full-state constraint defined by Equation 11 or Equation 13 is not
similar to the partial-position constraint (Equation 9). In the latter case, the values of velocity,
activation, and excitation are constrained by optimization. For a similar reason, the full-state
19
constraint defined by Equation 12 or Equation 14 is not similar to the partial-position/velocity
constraint (Equation 10).
The apparent complexity in the construction of task representations is due to the fact
that there are many implementation details and we deem it necessary to evaluate their
contribution to the functioning of the model.
Noise
In the proposed framework, variability is modeled by the presence of white noise sources.
We assumed that every process is possibly corrupted by noise and noise can be described by
the standard deviation (!) of a Gaussian variable. The dynamics (subscript m for motor;
Equation 2) and observation (subscript s for sensory; Equation 5) noises were described in
terms of signal-independent (SIN) and signal-dependent (SDN) terms (!"# , !!; !"# , !!;
! !
!"# , !!; !"# , !!; Guigon et al., 2008b; Todorov, 2005). Other sources of noise were
! !
considered for:
- ! , i.e. initially and at every ! , the nominal receding horizon ! became (1+!!!)! ,
! ! ! !
where ! is a realization of a standard normal variable and !! a parameter;
- ! , i.e. at every ! , the nominal goal time ! became (1+!!!)! , where ! is a realization
! ! ! !
of a standard normal variable and !! a parameter;
- !!, i.e. initially the nominal position goal !! became (1+!!!)!!, where ! is a realization
of a standard normal variable and !! a parameter.
The dynamics and observation noises were termed execution noises as they act
continuously during the movement. The other noises were termed planning noises as they act
before the movement and possibly discretely during the movement (at each ! ).
!
20
Parameters
Parameters were ! = 1 kg, ! = 0.05 s, ! = 0.28 s, ! = 0.13 s, and ! was the 4×4
! !
identity matrix. For calculating the Kalman gain, the ratio !!/!! was 0.001.
Solutions
The optimal feedback control policy and the Kalman gain were calculated analytically as
described in Guigon et al. (2008b), and simulated numerically with the time step ! =
0.001 s. A complete mathematical background is given in the Online Supplemental Material.
Two-dimensional inertial point
To simulate drawing movements, independent inertial points moving along perpendicular
directions in the plane were considered (same formulation, same parameters).
Data analysis
Simulations produced time series of position that were analyzed to determine movement
characteristics. Movement duration was defined by the time between the beginning of the
simulation and the end of the movement obtained by a velocity threshold (0.05 m/s).
Endpoint variability was defined as the standard deviation of the position at the end of the
movement. Timing variability was defined as the standard deviation of movement duration.
Fastest point-to-point movements: smoothness and isochrony
The fastest point-to-point movement was obtained when, starting from initial state
! = [0 0 0 0], a stationary target goal !! = [! 0 0 0], (! is the prescribed movement
!
amplitude; full-state constraint; Equation 11) was set at time ! = 0 and pursued at horizon !
!
(Figure 2A, dotted lines). The resulting trajectory was regular (Figure 2A) with a bell-shaped
velocity profile (Figure 1B). As movement amplitude increased, peak velocity increased and
movement duration remained constant (Figure 2B). These movements correspond to a unique
21
class of smooth movements with biphasic acceleration profiles (Figure 2B, inset). They were
close to minimum-jerk movements, with a jerk ratio of 1.5 (ratio between integrated jerk and
jerk of the corresponding minimum-jerk trajectory). Note that the goal time ! played no role
!
in these simulations since there were no via-points.
Two points should be noticed. First, by construction a movement obtained by control
with a receding horizon never really stops in the sense that there always remains the same
time to complete a movement irrespective of the remaining distance to the goal. In practice,
movement duration can be properly defined by setting a threshold below which velocity
fluctuations are negligible. The same consideration also applies to experimental recordings.
Second, humans can produce movements that are faster than those described here (~0.4 s vs
~0.2 s in Hoffman & Strick, 1986). Much faster displacements (~0.2 s) can be obtained in the
model in the framework of rhythmic movements (see Figure 12). The movements described
by Hoffman and Strick (1986) have large overshoots and terminal oscillations, and could be
considered as aborted rhythmic movements.
Figure 2. Simulation of the fastest point-to-point movements. A. Position
profiles. Amplitude of 0.1 m (black), 0.2 m (red), 0.3 m (green), 0.4 m (blue).
Dotted lines show task representation. B. Velocity profiles. Inset: acceleration
profiles.
Slow point-to-point movements: segmentation
A slow movement of mean speed ! was obtained with the full-state constraint, either the
zero-value (Equation 12) or the current-value (Equation 14) method, and the absolute goal
setting policy (Equation 7). The time series of goal states was built according to rules 1 and
4: goal states were chosen along the desired spatial path of the movement and updated with
period ! . Starting from initial state ! = 0 0 0 0 , the first goal state was !! = !! ! 0 0 ,
! ! ! !
and the following goal states were given by Equation 7 with ! = !! 0 0 0 . Accordingly,
! !
22
the position constraint was a staircase temporal signal of base ! and height !! (dotted
! !
lines; Figure 3A), and the velocity constraint a constant signal of size ! (dotted lines;
Figure 3B). The simulated position and velocity profiles are shown in Figure 3 (plain lines)
for 4 mean speeds. We showed previously that this model provides an accurate account of
properties of slow movements (Guigon et al., 2019). Note that these movements can be
terminated by setting a stationary target goal (Equation 6).
The relative goal setting policy (Equation 8) lead to slow movements which did not
comply with the required mean speed. The partial-position/velocity constraint (Equation 10)
lead to slow movements with smaller velocity fluctuations. As the value of ! was derived
!
from the size of these fluctuations (Guigon et al., 2019), it raises the possibility for a lower
value of ! . Yet an independent cross-check of the value of ! was obtained in the study of
! !
drawing movements (see below).
Figure 3. Simulation of slow point-to-point movements. A. Position profiles.
Mean speed of 0.025 m/s (black), 0.05 m/s (red), 0.075 m/s (green), 0.1 m/s
(blue). Simulations with full-state constraint, zero-value method, and absolute
goal setting policy. B. Velocity profiles. Dotted lines show task representation in
position and velocity.
Point-to-point movements of intermediate duration
Point-to-point movements that are neither very fast nor very slow have been ubiquitously
reported in the literature. For instance, the mean movement speed in the original data of Fitts
(1954) was in the range 10-100 cm/s (amplitude 5-40 cm, duration 0.18-0.73 s). The velocity
profile of such movements is more or less irregular and asymmetric with one or more peaks
(Darling, Cole, & Abbs, 1988; Morasso, Mussa-Ivaldi, & Ruggiero, 1983; Salmond et al.,
2017). Following the proposed principles, the duration of a movement is related to the
number and position of via-points used to define it. There is a priori an infinite number of
ways to set via-points. In keeping with the study of slow movements, we considered
23
movements built using via-points specified by a fraction of movement amplitude (rules 1, 2
and 4). For a movement of amplitude ! and fraction ! (in [0;1]), we took ! = !" to define
!
the position of the kth via-point (Equation 7 or Equation 8). A via-point whose position
exceeded ! was set at !, and considered as a target (Equation 6). Simulations were run for
one amplitude and 10 fractions (between 0.3 and 1), with full-state constraint and zero-value
method (Equation 11), for absolute (Equation 7; Figure 4A) and relative (Equation 8;
Figure 4D) goal setting policy.
For the absolute goal setting policy, the via-points were equally distributed along the
movements (Figure 4A), and the trajectories were regular (Figure 4B) with velocity profiles
that became more irregular as movement duration increased (Figure 4C). The fastest
movement was identical to those described in Figure 2 and the slowest movement was similar
to those described in Figure 3. For the relative goal setting policy, the distribution of via-
points along the movements was time-dependent (in fact, speed-dependent; Figure 4D), and
the trajectories were as described for the absolute goal setting policy (Figure 4E,F). The main
quantitative difference between the two goal setting policies is observed on the time to peak
velocity which scales with duration in one case (Figure 4C), but not in the other (Figure 4F).
This difference will be important in the study of scaling laws and Fitts’ laws (see below).
Figure 4. Simulation of movements of intermediate duration. A. Position of via-
points (plain square) for 10 movements of the same amplitude (diamond: start
point; circle: target) with the absolute goal setting policy. B. Trajectories of the
movements described in A. C. Velocity profiles of the movements described in
A. D. Same as A the relative goal setting policy. E. Trajectories of the
movements described in D. F. Velocity profiles of the movements described in D.
Drawing movements: isochrony and power laws
A shape was described by a sequence of appropriately placed via-points updated at period !
!
(rules 2 and 4). For instance, four points at the vertex of a square presented sequentially at
24
interval ! generated a circle figure (partial-position constraint, Equation 9; absolute goal
!
setting policy, Equation 7; Figure 5A). The corresponding times serie of positional goals is
shown in Figure 5B. No velocity goals were imposed at the via-points. Tangential velocity
was inversely correlated with curvature and cycle duration was constant (Figure 5E). A more
precise circle drawing was obtained with an 8-points sequence (Figure 5C,D). Drawing had
similar scaling properties, but was slower (Figure 5E). Cycle duration increased linearly with
the number of via-points (Figure 5E, inset).
For the same via-points, the partial-position/velocity (Equation 10) and the full-state
constraints (Equations 11-14) lead to polygons rather than circles. The relative goal setting
policy (Equation 8) was not appropriate to obtain a specific geometric shape.
Figure 5. Drawing circles. A. A 10-cm radius circle defined by 4 via-points
(colored squares; color code from left to right on the colorbar), 30 turns,
counterclockwise rotation. Mean cycle duration was 0.52 s. Calibration is 10 cm.
B. Time series of positional goals in x (thick) and y (thin) for A. C. A 10-cm
radius circle defined by 8 via-points (colored diamonds), 30 turns,
counterclockwise rotation. Mean cycle duration was 1.04 s. D. Time series of
positional goals in x (thick) and y (thin) for C. E. Relationship
curvature/tangential velocity (left axis, closed symbols) and curvature/cycle
duration (right axis, open symbols). Squares correspond to 4 via-points, diamond
to 8 via-points. Dashed line from Viviani and McCollum (1983), fig. 3A. Inset:
relationship between the number of via-points and cycle duration. Simulations
with partial-position constraint, absolute goal setting policy, in the presence of
!"# (!! = 1).
!
Studies of drawing curved shapes revealed a simple power law relationship
!(!) ∝ !(!)!!
between tangential velocity ! and curvature ! with ! ≈ 1/3 (Lacquaniti, Terzuolo, &
Viviani, 1983). An ellipse defined by the four vertices of a rectangle (with an aspect ratio of
2) is shown in Figure 6A and complies with the one-third power law (Figure 6B).
Huh and Sejnowski (2015) showed that there exists a continuum of power laws
related to the frequency content of shapes (see also Zago, Matic, Flash, Gomez-Marin, &
25
Lacquaniti, 2018). We built a via-point representation of 12 shapes (rules 2 and 4)
corresponding to frequencies ! = 2/33, 2/5, 3/5, 2/3, 4/5, 4/3, 3/2, 2 (ellipse), 5/2, 3, 4, 5
according to the equation
!"#(!) = !"#$(!")
in polar coordinates (!,!), ! is a parameter (chosen to obtain the shapes shown in Huh and
Sejnowski, fig. 4). The exponent ! of the power law varied with frequency with a trend close
to that reported experimentally (Figure 6C). The one-third power law was observed only for
ellipses. A parametric analysis of these results shows that the chosen values of ! and !
! !
provide the best account of experimental data over the range [0.18-0.48] for ! and [0.13-
!
0.23] for ! (Appendix A, Figure A1).
!
Figure 6. Power laws. A. Ellipse defined by 4 via-points, 40 turns,
counterclockwise rotation, arbitrary dimension. Same conventions as in
Figure 5A. B. Instantaneous relationship between tangential velocity and
curvature for the ellipse in A. ! = 0.328 (!! = 0.98). C. Relationship between
frequency content ! and power law exponent ! for 12 shapes. Dotted line from
Huh and Sejnowski (2015), dashed line from Zago et al. (2018). Horizontal and
vertical plain lines indicate the case of an ellipse (! = 2, ! ≈ 1/3). Simulations
with partial-position constraint, absolute goal setting policy, in the presence of
!"# (!! = 1).
!
Handwriting
The word "flow" was used for comparison with Huys et al. (2014). It was described as a time
series of 21 via-points (Figure 7A): the letter f was represented by two symmetrical
rectangular triangles (dark blue), the letter l by an isocele triangle (light blue), the letter o by
a smaller triangle (green) and the letter w by a kind of w (yellow to red). The methods were
as described for drawing. The writing was smooth (Figure 7B), made of strokes (Figure 7C),
and isochronous (by construction), consistent with experimental observations (Denier van der
Gon, & Thuring, 1965; Hollerbach, 1981; Viviani & Terzuolo, 1982). This simulation is
26
provided here for illustrative purpose. The via-points were chosen by hand. No general recipe
for building word representations was searched for. In fact, there are no specific
characteristics of handwriting that could be used to challenge the theory.
Figure 7. Writing the word "flow". A. Via-point representation of the word. The
via-points are shown as nodes of a graph connected by colored edges. The order
is indicated by the color gradient. B. Written word. The colors correspond to the
via-point representation. C. Velocity profile. No spatial unit is necessary since
writing is isochronous. Simulation with partial-position constraint, absolute goal
setting policy, in the absence of noise.
Scaling laws
Scaling laws correspond to ubiquitous relationships between movement characteristics (e.g.
amplitude and duration; Fitts, 1954; Gordon, Ghilardi, Cooper, & Ghez, 1994). For instance,
the fastest point-to-point movements of Figure 2 have constant duration and time to peak
velocity, and linearly increasing peak velocity and peak acceleration with amplitude
(Figure 8A). We call this pattern an isochronous scaling law. To analyze the diversity of
scaling laws, we considered movements built as described for movements of intermediate
duration (Figure 4A,D). Simulations were run for 4 amplitudes and 10 fractions (between 0.5
and 1), with full-state constraint and zero-value method (Equation 11), for absolute
(Equation 7; Figure 8B) and relative (Equation 8; Figure 8C) goal setting policy. For ! < 1,
there was one via-point for absolute goal setting policy (Appendix B, Figure B1A), and one
or two via-points for relative goal setting policy (Figure B1B). We observed that each
fraction ! corresponded to a specific isochronous scaling law (one color; Figure 8B,C). For
each amplitude, movement duration increased and peak velocity/acceleration decreased as !
decreased. As already observed (Figure 4C,F), the two goal setting policies differed on the
time to peak velocity: it scaled with ! for absolute goal setting policy and was constant for
27
relative goal setting policy (Figure 8B,C). The scaling laws remained similar for the current-
value method (Equation 13).
Figure 8. Scaling laws. A. Scaling laws for the fastest point-point movements
(data from Figure 2). (circle) movement duration, left side axis; (square) time to
peak velocity, right side axis. B. A family of isochronous scaling law obtained
with full-state constraint, zero-value method and absolute goal setting policy.
Each point corresponds to a movement of a given amplitude and a specific
position of via-points. Each color corresponds to four movements (amplitudes
0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 m) with a specific fraction (10 fractions between 0.5 and 1) of
amplitude between the via-points. For instance a fraction of 0.6 means that the
four movements have one via-point at 0.06, 0.12, 0.18 and 0.24 m, respectively.
C. Same as B with relative goal setting policy.
From a family of isochronous scaling laws (Figure 8B,C), different types of scaling
strategies could be obtained (Figure 9):
- via-points at a decreasing fraction of amplitude with absolute goal setting policy gave
movements with increasing duration, time to peak velocity, peak velocity, and peak
acceleration (Figure 9A; Gordon et al., 1994);
- via-points at a fixed distance with absolute goal setting policy gave movements with
increasing duration, peak velocity and time to peak velocity, but constant peak acceleration
(Figure 8B; non-dominant strategy in Sainburg & Schaeffer, 2004);
- via-points at a decreasing fraction of amplitude with relative goal setting policy gave
movements with increasing duration, peak velocity and peak acceleration, but constant time
to peak velocity (Figure 9C; dominant strategy in Sainburg & Schaeffer, 2004).
The model can thus account for the fact that the kinematic landmarks of a movement
do not systematically scale with changes in movement duration (Baraduc, Thobois, Gan,
Broussolle, & Desmurget, 2013; Sainburg & Schaeffer, 2004; Sarlegna, Blouin, Bresciani,
Bourdin, Vercher, & Gauthier, 2003; Torres & Andersen, 2006; Worringham, 1991). The
28
model does not provide a rationale for the different strategies, but this issue will become
clearer in the framework of Fitts’ law (see below).
Figure 9. Three scaling strategies. A. Absolute goal setting policy, via-points at
fraction 0.9, 0.8, 0.7 and 0.6, for amplitude 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 m, respectively.
B. Absolute goal setting policy, via-points at 0.11 m for all amplitudes.
C. Relative goal setting policy, via-points at fraction 0.9, 0.8, 0.7 and 0.6,
respectively. Same conventions as in Figure 8. Below each scaling strategie, the
position of the via-points for each amplitude is shown (same format as in
Figure 4A,D).
Discrete and rhythmic movements
There exists a classical distinction between discrete and rhythmic movements (Guiard, 1993;
Hogan & Sternad, 2007). An open question is whether the model can account for this
distinction. To produce a rhythmic behavior, we considered a sequence of two alternating
position goals (distance 0.2 m) at a fixed frequency (corresponding to an internally generated
periodic signal) as a task representation (rules 1 and 3), with partial-position constraint
(Equation 9). At 1.5 Hz, position, velocity and acceleration traces were almost sinusoidal
(Figure 10A). There were no dwell periods (i.e. periods of near-zero velocity) and
harmonicity (defined as the ratio between minimum and maximum acceleration; Guiard,
1993) was close to one. At 0.7 Hz, kinematics was much more irregular with consistent dwell
periods and near zero harmonicity (Figure 10B). Dwell time and amplitude decreased with
frequency (Figure 10C), and harmonicity increased with frequency (Figure 10D).
Qualitatively, nonzero dwell times were found for frequencies below 1 Hz, i.e. for
unidirectional displacements longer than 0.5 s, consistent with Sternad, Marino, Charles,
Duarte, Dipietro, & Hogan (2013). The corresponding movements are considered as discrete
(Hogan & Sternad, 2007). We note that movements of such durations (> 0.5 s) could be
produced using via-points (see Figure 8; rule 5) and would not encompass a dwell time.
Using either the partial-position/velocity or the full-state constraint lead to qualitatively
29
similar results at high frequencies and a shift to nonzero dwell times around 2 Hz. These
results do not depend on the goal time ! since the goals were updated at imposed
!
frequencies.
These results show that the distinction between discrete and rhythmic movements
could correspond to a change in behavior (appearance of dwell periods) with required
movement frequency of one and the same control process. Further analysis of rhythmic
movements is given in Appendix C.
Figure 10. Rhythmic movements. A. (top) Position and acceleration (bottom)
Velocity. Vertical dashed and dotted lines delimit dwell periods (velocity
threshold at 0.01 m/s). Frequency was 1.5 Hz. Dwell time was 0.015 s.
Harmonicity was 0.67. B. Same as A for a frequency of 0.7 Hz. Dwell time was
0.172 s. Harmonicity was 0.28. C. Mean dwell time as a function of frequency.
Inset: mean movement amplitude as a function of frequency. (gray circle) 1.5 Hz;
(black circle) 0.7 Hz. D. Mean harmonicity as a function of frequency.
Simulations with partial-position constraint, in the presence of !"# (!! = 2).
!
Simulation duration was 120 s.
Fitts’ law
In the presence of noise, scaling laws (see above) define a tripartite relationship between
movement amplitude, duration and endpoint variability. We explored this relationship for
discrete and rhythmic (reciprocal) movements.
Discrete Fitts’ law
We simulated series of movements of different amplitudes and with via-points at different
positions corresponding to the scaling strategies of Figure 8B (absolute goal setting policy)
and 8C (relative goal setting policy) in the presence of !"# (see below for the influence of
!
noise on Fitts’ law; Figure 16). We measured actual movement amplitude (!), duration (!",
to keep a traditional notation) and endpoint variability (!), and we analyzed the relationship
between the effective index of difficulty !" = !"# (2!/!) and !". As expected from Fitts’
!
30
law, !" was a linear function of !" (Figure 11A,B). We note that the actual range of !" is
arbitrary: changing the level of noise or the definition of endpoint variability would shift the
range of !" with no effect on !" (this remark applies to all the simulations involving a
calculus of !"). Time to peak velocity and time after peak velocity increased with !" for
absolute goal setting policy (Figure 11C) while time to peak velocity remained constant for
relative goal setting policy (Figure 11D). These two strategies were observed in the study of
discrete Fitts’ law (Poletti, Sleimen-Malkoun, Temprado, & Lemaire, 2015; Sleimen-
Malkoun, Temprado, & Berton, 2013; Temprado, Sleimen-Malkoun, Lemaire, Rey-Robert,
Retornaz, & Berton, 2013). Note that, for each amplitude, peak velocity decreased with !!
for the relative goal setting policy (Figure 11B, inset; MacKenzie, Marteniuk, Dugas, Liske,
& Eckmeier, 1987). Fitts’ law was observed with the zero-value method, but not with the
current-value method.
Figure 11. Discrete Fitts’ law. A. Movement duration as a function of !". 5
amplitudes (0.1-0.5 m), via-points at 5 equi-spaced distances (0.11, 0.132, 0.155,
0.178, 0.2 m). Simulations with full-state constraint, zero-value method, absolute
goal setting policy. B. Movement duration as a function of !". 5 amplitudes (0.1-
0.5 m), via-points at 5 fractions (0.65, 0.725, 0.8, 0.875, 0.95). Simulations with
full-state constraint, zero-value method, relative goal setting policy. Inset: peak
velocity as a function of !". (diamond) 0.1 m; (up triangle) 0.2 m; (down
triangle) 0.3 m; (left triangle) 0.4 m; (right triangle) 0.5 m. C. Time to peak
(black) and time after peak (gray) velocity as a function of function of !" for data
in A. D. Time to peak (black) and time after peak (gray) velocity as a function of
function of !" for data in B. Simulations in the presence of !"# (!! = 1).
!
Variability calculated over 500 trials per condition.
Rhythmical (reciprocal) Fitts’ law
We simulated series of rhythmical movements of a given amplitude as explained above
(Figure 10) for frequencies in the range 0.7-2.5 Hz. As movement amplitude decreases with
frequency (Figure 10C, inset), compensatory changes in movement amplitude with frequency
were used to obtain the desired amplitude (Figure 12B, inset). For the given amplitude,
31
movement duration and time to peak velocity increased linearly with !" for !" below 4
(Figure 12A). Dwell time increased with !" (Figure 12B) and harmonicity decreased for !"
below 4 (Figure 12C). These observations are consistent with experimental results for low
!"s (Boyle & Shea, 2013; Buchanan, 2013). The behavior changed above !" = 4 (low
frequencies) consistent with a transition between rhythmic and discrete movements (Huys,
Fernandez, Bootsma, & Jirsa, 2010). The data for !" > 4 are shown, but are wrong in the
sense that a different mechanism is involved at higher IDs (lower frequencies; see above,
Figure 11B,D).
The rhythmical movements obeyed to Fitts’ law, i.e. a univocal relationship was
found between !" and movement duration for different amplitudes (Figure 13A). Peak
velocity decreased with !" as observed experimentally (Figure 13B; Boyle & Shea, 2013). A
rhythmical Fitts’ law was not observed for partial-position/velocity and full-state constraints.
Figure 12. Rhythmical Fitts’ law (single amplitude). A. Movement duration
(circle) and time to peak velocity (square) as a function of !". Amplitude was
0.2 m. B. Dwell time. Inset: compensatory changes in amplitude as a function of
frequency. Dotted line corresponds to 0.2 m (desired amplitude). C. Harmonicity.
(gray lines) data from Buchanan (2013). 15 frequencies in the range 0.7-2.5 Hz.
Simulations with partial-position constraint, in the presence of !"# (!! = 2).
!
Variability calculated over 500 trials per condition.
Figure 13. Rhythmical Fitts’ law (multiple amplitudes). A. Movement duration as
a function of !" for 3 amplitudes: (red) 0.1 m; (black) 0.2 m; (green) 0.3 m.
B. Peak velocity as a function of !". Same parameters as in Figure 12.
Timing
Movements can be made toward spatial targets, but also toward temporal events (e.g. the beat
of a metronome; Howarth, Beggs, & Bowden, 1971). There is evidence that movements
directed at spatial and temporal goals are subserved by different processes (Howarth et al.,
32
1971; Huys et al., 2010). For the model, this means that the task representation used to
produce rhythmic movements (see above) is not appropriate to explain how movements get
synchronized with a metronome. An attempt to address this issue is the following. We
observe that the kinematics of a movement toward a temporal goal have peculiar features, i.e.
its velocity profile is asymmetrical and peak velocity occurs late in the movement (Cos,
Girard, & Guigon, 2015; Craig, Pepping, & Grealy, 2005; Port, Lee, Dassonville, &
Georgopoulos, 1997; Rieger, 2007; Walter & Rieger, 2012). Furthermore time to peak
velocity increases all the more so that the period of the metronome increases (Cos et al.,
2015). We assume that this property is specific to timing as it has never been reported in
other motor conditions. We searched for a task representation of timing in terms of via-
points. The size of peak velocities depends on the distance between via-points, thus to obtain
larger velocity peaks later in the movement, it is sufficient to consider nearby via-points at
the begin of the movement and more distant via-points later. Accordingly, the distance
between the via-points !−1 and ! was chosen to be !"# where ! is the movement
amplitude and ! a parameter in [0,1]. Simulated velocity profiles are shown in Figure 14A.
Time to peak velocity increased with movement duration and occurred later in proportion of
duration (Figure 14B). Variability in movement duration increased with movement duration
in the presence of noise on the goal time (Figure 14A, inset). !"# was not sufficient to
!
obtain this kind of variability.
Figure 14. Simulation of movements with late peak velocity. A. Velocity profiles.
See Text for explanation. Colors from blue to red:
! = 0.025,0.05,0.075,0.1,0.125,0.15,0.2,0.3. Movement amplitude was 0.2 m.
Inset: standard deviation of movement duration as a function of movement
duration. B. Relationship between movement duration and time to peak velocity
in s (left axis, open squares) and % of movement duration (right axis, closed
squares). Simulations with full-state constraint, zero-value method, relative goal
setting policy, in the presence of !"# (!! = 2) and noise on the goal time
!
(!! = 0.005). Variability calculated over 500 trials per condition.
33
We assessed the relationship between amplitude, duration and variability for timing
movements as we did for the study of Fitts’ law. Movement duration increased with the index
of difficulty, but the slope was steeper than for a Fitts’ task (Figure 15A; Howarth et al.,
1971; Huys et al., 2010). Spatial variability increased linearly with average velocity
(Figure 15B; Schmidt, Zelaznik, Hawkins, Franck, & Quinn, 1979; Wright & Meyer, 1983).
Temporal variability increased linearly with movement duration (Figure 15C; Bongers,
Fernandez, & Bootsma, 2009). These results show that the model can account for specific
characteristics of speed/accuracy tradeoff in a timing task. We note that the model is unable
to account for the presence of pauses that precede movements toward temporal events in
synchronization tasks (Cos et al., 2015; Donnet, Bartolo, Fernandes, Cunha, Prado, &
Merchant, 2014; Hove & Keller, 2010).
The robustness of these results is the following. The results remained qualitatively
similar under the current-value method, for partial position-velocity and partial-position
constraint, in the absence of !"# . The structure of temporal variability (Figure 15C)
!
disappeared in the absence of temporal noise. The results were lost with absolute goal setting,
in the presence of !"# and with noise only on the receding horizon.
!
Figure 15. Tripartite relationship between amplitude, duration and variability for
timing movements. A. Movement duration as a function !". Three movement
amplitudes (0.2, 0.3, 0.4 m) and 10 fractions (! between 0.02 and 0.2). Gray lines
from Howarth et al. (1971), fig. 3: (dashed) data from Fitts (1954); (solid) timing
task. B. Spatial variability as a function of average velocity. C. Temporal
variability as a function of movement duration. Simulations with full-state
constraint, zero-value method, relative goal setting policy, in the presence of
!"# (!! = 2) and noise on the goal time (!! = 0.005). Variability calculated
!
over 500 trials per condition (amplitude, fraction).
Structure of variability and the nature of noise
In the preceding simulations, we used sources of white Gaussian noise to explain variability.
We address here the role of the different sources.
34
We have shown that discrete Fitts’ law can be explained by the presence of !"#
!
(Figure 11). We assessed the basic tripartite relationship between amplitude, duration and
variability for the different types of noise (except !"# which has a deleterious effect on
!
control). The simulations confirmed the proper role of !"# (Figure 16, black; see
!
Figure 11A) and showed that variability produced by the other sources of noise did not
comply to Fitts’ law, i.e. there was no univocal relationship between movement duration and
!" (Figure 16, red, green, blue, purple, yellow).
Figure 16. Simulation of discrete Fitts’ law for different sources of noise. (black)
!"# (!! = 2); (red) !"# (!! = 0.0001); (green) !"# (!! = 0.5); (blue) !
! ! ! !
(!! = 0.2); (purple) ! (!! = 0.2); (yellow) !! (!! = 0.01). Noise standard
!
deviations were chosen to obtain similar ranges of !", except for noise on !
!
which cannot produce a larger variability. Only the type of noise indicated was
present. 3 amplitudes (0.2, 0.25, 0.3 m). Variability calculated over 500 trials per
condition.
When participants repeatedly produce movements of a given amplitude, movement
duration (!") covaries with peak velocity (!"), i.e. !" ∝ !"!! with ! ≈ 0.8 (van Beers,
Haggard, & Wolpert, 2004; see also Messier & Kalaska, 1999). This property was found in
the model for !"# , noise on ! and noise on ! (Figures 17A,B,C), although the velocity
! ! !
profiles were peculiar for the two latter noises (Figure 17A, inset; 17B).
Figure 17. Variability of velocity profiles. A. Velocity profiles (gray lines) and
peak velocity (black circle) for !"# (!! = 2). 100 trials are shown. Inset: same
!
for ! (blue) and ! (purple) noise. B. Relationship between peak velocity and
! !
movement duration for the data in A. 500 trials are shown. C. Exponent ! of the
relationship between peak velocity and movement duration vs !! of the
relationship. Vertical dashed line indicates ! = 0.8 (expected value; van Beers et
al., 2004). (black) !"# (!! = 2); (red) !"# (!! = 0.00005); (green) !"#
! ! !
(!! = 0.25); (blue) ! (!! = 0.18); (purple) ! (!! = 0.2); (yellow) !!
! !
(!! = 0.004). Standard deviations of noise were chosen to obtain an !" ≈ 7,
except for ! . Simulations with full-state constraint, zero-value method, absolute
!
goal setting policy. Amplitude 0.1 m, via-point at 0.07 m, chosen to obtain a
movement duration around 0.4 s as in van Beers et al. (2004). Variability
calculated over 500 trials.
35
We assessed basic aspects of correlation, spatial and temporal variability across
repetitions of a movement of a given amplitude (Figure 18): 1. correlation between position
at kinematic landmarks and endpoint position (Heath, Westwood, & Binsted, 2004;
Figure 18A); 2. correlation between position at normalized time and endpoint position
(Heath, Neely, & Krigolson, 2008; Figure 18B); 3. correlation between the value of
kinematic landmarks (Messier & Kalaska, 1999; Figure 18C); 4. positional standard deviation
at normalized time (Liu & Todorov, 2007; Figure 18D); 5. positional standard deviation of
kinematic landmarks (Khan, Elliot, Coull, Chua, & Lyons, 2002; Figure 18E); 6. temporal
standard deviation of kinematic landmarks (Valdez & Amazeen, 2008; Figure 18F). Each
panel in Figure 18 shows simulations with 6 types of noise (colored lines, circles) and
experimental data (gray lines, triangles) which are characteristic of properties reported in the
literature. We observed again that the presence of !"# (black lines compared to gray lines)
!
provides a good quantitative account of the structure of variability of point-to-point
movements. The presence of the other sources of noise led to contrasted results in particular
as far as correlations were concerned (Figure 18A,B,C). Interestingly, both execution and
planning noises can account for classical observations on the time course of positional
variance (Figure 18D; Krüger, Eggert, & Straube, 2011; Krüger, Straube, & Eggert, 2017;
Liu & Todorov, 2007; Mosier, Scheidt, Acosta, & Mussa-Ivaldi, 2005; Osu, Morishige,
Nakanishi, Miyamoto, & Kawato, 2015; Selen, Beek, & van Dieën, 2006) which is generally
thought to arise from execution noise (Guigon et al., 2008b; Todorov & Jordan, 2002).
Figure 18. Variability of kinematic landmarks. A. Correlation coefficient
between position at peak acceleration (PA), peak velocity (PV) and peak
deceleration (PD) and endpoint position. The green curve is superimposed on the
red one. Data from Heath et al. (2004), fig. 7. B. Correlation coefficient between
spatial position at normalized times and endpoint position. Data from Heath et al.
(2008), fig. 7. C. Mean correlation coefficient between kinematic markers (A,
amplitude). Data from Messier and Kalaska (1999), fig. 11. D. Positional
standard deviation at normalized times. Data from Liu and Todorov (2007),
36
fig. 1e. E. Positional standard deviation at kinematic markers in percent of
movement amplitude. Data from Khan et al. (2002), fig. 5. F. Temporal standard
deviation at kinematic markers in percent of movement amplitude. Data from
Valdez and Amazeen (2008), fig. 8. (gray, triangle) experimental data; (black)
!"# (!! = 2); (red) !"# (!! = 0.000075); (green) !"# (!! = 0.4); (blue)
! ! !
! (!! = 0.25); (purple) ! (!! = 0.2); (yellow) !! (!! = 0.01). Standard
! !
deviations of noise were chosen to obtain similar ranges of positional standard
deviation (D), except for ! . Simulations with full-state constraint, zero-value
!
method, absolute goal setting. Amplitude 0.2 m, via-point at 0.18 m. Variability
calculated over 500 trials.
Discussion
We presented an ensemble of simulations of motor behaviors designed following two
guidelines. First they all involved the same control process. Second they each contained a
specific description of a task (task representation) in terms of a spatiotemporal sequence of
goals. The sequence was in general naturally related to the task, sometimes not so naturally
but intuitively related to the task (movements of intermediate duration), and in a case the
construction was more speculative (timing). If all the results may not be equally convincing,
the overall impression is that the proposed theory has a large explanatory power that extends
across many aspects of motor control. Several aspects of this work (submovement,
intermittency) have been comprehensively discussed previously (Guigon et al., 2019) and are
not addressed here.
Disclaimer
The present work should not be considered as a subservient extension of a dominant theory
(computational theory of motor control; Scott, 2004; Todorov & Jordan, 2002; Todorov,
2004; Wolpert & Ghahramani, 2000), but as the outcome of a slow and in-depth progression
in the field of motor control (Guigon, 2010, 2011; Guigon et al., 2019; Rigoux & Guigon,
2012). It acknowledges past and present debates on motor control (Ajemian & Hogan, 2010;
Feldman & Levin, 1995; Friston, 2011; Mohan, Bhat, & Morasso, 2019; Turvey, 1977),
37
recognizes the existence of divergent positions, and makes some attempts toward a
reconciliation. Using a receding horizon renders the control process stationary (i.e.
independent of time) and intrinsically flexible in agreement with the dynamical systems
approach to motor control (Kelso, 1995). The receding horizon also provides a natural
continuity between movement and posture (Guigon, 2010) as in the equilibrium-point theory
(Feldman & Levin, 1995). Yet the proposed theory remains sensitive to numerous criticisms
attached to the representational view of action (Warren, 2006). Instead of trying to argue in
vain against these criticisms, we developed two points based on the position/force dichotomy
and the structured nature of motor variability that illustrate the power of the computational
approach over other modeling frameworks (see below Debates on motor control). It is not a
manoeuvre to bypass a debate, but a way to focus on technical arguments that are amenable
to experimental testing rather than conceptual and philosophical arguments.
Time in motor control
A central difficulty of the computational approach to motor control is how time is processed
during the course of an action. By construction, no movement is possible without choosing in
advance a time horizon (Equation 1). If no other principle is available, the time horizon
remains fixed along the course of the movement, leading to a nonstationary control policy
and an absence of flexibility in time. A paradoxical aspect of the proposed theory is to
address these difficulties by setting two rigidly defined time constants (receding horizon,
update period of goals). Control with a receding horizon benefits from an automatic updating
of the time to achieve goals, which is necessary when perturbations are encountered (Liu &
Todorov, 2007; Pélisson, Prablanc, Goodale, & Jeannerod, 1986; Shadmehr & Mussa-Ivaldi,
1994). Although the initial time horizon is set to the receding horizon, actual movement
duration is an emergent property of the interaction between the controller and the
38
environment. Movement duration also depends on self-selected goals (via-points) updated at
a fixed period. Simple rules for the choice of via-points produce realistic scaling laws,
speed/accuracy tradeoffs, and synchronization movements. A time series of spatial goals is an
appropriate proxy for the specification of movement duration, precision and timing. The
theory provides a principled approach to time processing in motor control which is consistent
with the existence of isochronous behaviors and the nonsmooth aspect of most movements
expect the fastest ones.
Isochrony
A core property of the model is the production of isochronous actions. The origin of
isochrony is unknown, but is considered here as a native characteristic of the model that
underlies all other emergent properties. This view is consistent with the idea that time is
given priority over space in motor control (Ashton, 1976; Lashley, 1951). For instance, in
speech production, consistent timing is essential for intelligibility of speech (Faulkner &
Rosen, 1999) and is preserved in patients with Parkinson’s disease at the expense of
amplitudes and velocities of lip displacements (Caligiuri, 1987; Connor, Abbs, Cole, &
Gracco, 1989; Walsh & Smith, 2012). In the production of rhythmic arm movements, Levy-
Tzedek, Ben Tov, & Karniel (2011) have shown that the participants exerted a stronger
control on movement frequency than on amplitude or velocity.
Isochrony is not a priori a unitary concept. It has been observed for fast, discrete
movements (Bryan, 1892; Jeannerod, 1984) and for slower, continuous motor activities
(drawing, handwriting; Denier van der Gon & Thuring, 1965; Lacquaniti, Terzuolo, &
Viviani, 1983; Viviani & McCollum, 1983). In the former case, isochrony could be a direct
consequence of control with a receding horizon. In the latter, it could be due to both the
receding horizon and the representation of task by series of goals updated at a fixed
39
frequency, i.e. isochronous actions are those that have the same number of via-points
irrespective of their amplitude (Figure 5). The failure to keep being perfectly isochronous in
drawing circle of increasing size (Bennequin, Fuchs, Berthoz, & Flash, 2009; Viviani &
Cenzato, 1985; Viviani & Schneider, 1991) could be explained by a strategic increase in the
number of via-points with the perimeter of the circle to avoid an excessive increase in
energetic expenditure, peak velocity, or variability (speed/accuracy tradeoff). Interestingly,
the principles that lead to isochrony also account for the existence of power laws (Figure 6;
Huh & Sejnowski, 2015; Lacquaniti et al., 1983; Zago et al., 2018). Accordingly, the
framework proposed by Bennequin et al. (2009) to explain isochrony and power laws in
terms of multiple geometries might be unwarrantedly complex.
An open question is whether an optimality principle could account for isochrony. As
noted previously, a cost of time (Harris & Wolpert, 2006; Hoff, 1994; Shadmehr et al., 2010)
could explain the compensatory regulation of movement speed with amplitude to maintain
movement duration approximately constant. Yet we would never obtain a strict isochrony
since it is not a rational behavior to spend more cost to keep a constant duration. A possible
normative account of isochrony can be derived in the framework of reward/effort-based
optimal motor control (Rigoux & Guigon, 2012). We assume that the utility of producing an
action of intensity ! (e.g. force, amplitude) and duration ! to obtain a reward ! is ! = !/!−
!!!/!! (which is a simplified version of the model developed in Rigoux & Guigon, 2012; !
is a conversion factor) which defines a trade-off between the benefits and costs of an action.
Maximum utility (with respect to !) is !∗ = !!/4!!! and is obtained for !∗ = 2!!!/!. We
also assume that the reward ! can be interpreted as a "motivational investment", i.e. how hard
we are ready to work for a given action, and we search for a function ! = !(!) which
maximizes
40
!∗(!)
!! (!"#$%&'( 15)
!(!)
(ratio between utility and investment across the range of action intensities). Using the
calculus of variations, the function ! should obey to the differential equation
!!!(!)−2!"(!) = 0,
which gives !(!) = !!! where ! is a constant. The optimal utility is !∗ = !"/4 and the
optimal time is !∗ = 2/! which is constant. In this framework, isochrony is the outcome of
an optimization process (Equation 15). Although it is interesting to have a normative
explanation of isochrony, it is unclear whether this explanation is superior and more
informative than a basic explanation based on the role of isochrony in the synchronization of
multiple neural and behavioral events.
Handwriting
Morasso and Mussa-Ivaldi (1982) distinguished muscle-oriented and space-oriented models
of trajectory formation. In the former models, geometrical and mechanical (elastic) properties
of muscles create parametric oscillatory dynamics that produce curved trajectories, e.g.
drawings, letters (Hollerbach, 1981; Singer & Tishby, 1994). These models foreshadowed
refined developments in the framework of the dynamical approach to motor control in which
interactions on multiple time scales and between multiple dynamical patterns produce
sequential, coordinated actions (e.g. handwriting; Huys et al., 2014; Perdikis, Huys, & Jirsa,
2011; for a different, but related work, see also Friston, Mattout, & Kilner, 2011). The latter
space-oriented models are based on trajectory control in space either through combinations of
motor primitives (strokes; Bullock, Grossberg, & Mannes, 1993; Edelman & Flash, 1987;
Morasso & Mussa-Ivaldi, 1982) or through via-point representations (Gilet, Diard, &
Bessière, 2011; Meulenbroek, Rosenbaum, Thomassen, Loukopoulos, & Vaughan, 1996;
41
Wada & Kawato, 1995; the present model). Most of these models produce realistic writing
patterns, and many characteristic properties of handwriting such as isochrony and
curvature/velocity relationship easily emerge. A more challenging issue is the absolute time
scale of writing processes, e.g. the duration of individual strokes. Although it is difficult to
pinpoint a single number (due to the heterogeneity of acquisition and data processing
methods, in particular the filtering cutoff frequency), a realistic range is 0.1-0.3 s (Teulings &
Stelmach, 1991). The value obtained here is ~0.19 s (16 velocity peaks in 3 s; Figure 6C) and
is constant by construction. None of the models discussed above (nor other models) can
account for the existence of a fixed duration of strokes because the processing time scale is in
general determined by some free parameters (coefficients of a dynamics, stiffness, …). The
strength of the present theory is to enable the coexistence of processing at a constant time
scale on the one hand and full temporal flexibility on the other hand.
Fitts’ law
The fact that the model accounts for Fitts’ law is not a surprise. The tripartite relationship
between amplitude, duration and variability appears to be a ubiquitous consequence of
control in the presence of multiplicative motor noise (Guigon et al., 2008a; Harris & Wolpert,
1998; Hoff & Arbib, 1992; Meyer, Abrams, Kornblum, Wright, & Smith, 1988; Qian et al.,
2013; Rigoux & Guigon, 2012; Tanaka, Krakauer, & Qian, 2006). The main contribution of
the theory is to explain 3 types of Fitts’ law (discrete, rhythmic, temporal) and the kinematics
of movements that obey to these laws. This corresponds to a major improvement in the
computational description of Fitts’ law since previous models accounted for a single type of
Fitts’ law and only in terms of unrealistic smooth movements of arbitrary duration (Guigon et
al., 2008a; Harris & Wolpert, 1998; Jean & Berret, 2017).
42
Motor variability
Variability is a central theme in the study of motor control that goes beyond Fitts’ law.
Common observations are that no two movements toward the same goal are exactly the same
and variability calculated along repeated trajectories is not uniform (structured variability;
Darling et al., 1988; Todorov & Jordan, 2002). Although most motor control theorists often
cite Bernstein and agree with his claim that "the global structure of the movement remains
the same, while the (details of the) movements never exactly repeat themselves" (citation
from Meijer & Bruijn, 2007; original article of Bernstein in Feldman & Meijer, 1999),
observations on motor variability and its structure have raised little interest and contributed
little to theoretical constructs except in the computational framework (for an exception see
Martin, Reimann, & Schöner, 2019). It could be revealing to see how variability emerges in
other frameworks.
Admittedly, the methodology used for the study of variability has obvious limitations.
First, noise is modeled as a white Gaussian stochastic process, although other types of noise
exist. Second, part of the motor variability may not be uniquely related to the presence of
noise (e.g. existence of trial-to-trial corrective processes; van Beers, Brenner, & Smeets,
2013) or to the presence of uncorrelated noise (e.g. existence of long-range correlations in
series of motor actions; Slifkin & Eder, 2012). Yet, despite these limitations, consistent
conclusions can be drawn. First, signal-dependent (multiplicative) motor noise is a major
determinant of variability (Figures 16, 17, 18) consistent with previous experimental and
theoretical results (Guigon et al., 2008b; Harris & Wolpert, 1998; Jones, Hamilton, &
Wolpert, 2002; Meyer et al., 1988; Todorov, 2002; Todorov & Jordan, 2002). Second,
planning noise contributes to movement variability, in particular for the production of
temporal variability (Churchland, Afshar, & Shenoy, 2006; van Beers et al., 2004), and
43
possibly for the emergence of speed/accuracy tradeoff (Al Borno, Vyas, Shenoy, & Delp,
2020).
Discrete and rhythmic movements
There is strong evidence that discrete and rhythmic movements are not of the same nature,
i.e. neither a rhythmic movement results from the concatenation of discrete segments nor a
discrete movement can be identified to a truncated rhythmic movement (Guiard, 1993; Hogan
& Sternad, 2007; van Mourik & Beek, 2004). Theoretical considerations on this distinction
based on motor primitives (e.g. central pattern generators) have been reviewed by Degallier
and Ijspeert (2010). The central theme was related to nonlinear dynamical equations whose
solution corresponds to discrete or rhythmic patterns depending on parameters (Degallier,
Righetti, Natale, Nori, Metta, & Ijspeert, 2008; de Rugy & Sternad, 2003; Huys, Studenka,
Rheaume, Zelaznik, & Jirsa, 2008; Jirsa & Kelso, 2005; Ronsse, Sternad, & Lefèvre, 2009;
Schaal, Kotosaka, & Sternad, 2000; Schöner, 1990). None of the described models can
account for the changes in characteristics of rhythmic movements with frequency and the
transition to discrete movements at lower frequencies (Guiard, 1993; Sternad et al., 2013).
An alternative approach was described by Biess, Nagurka, & Flash (2006) who
defined discrete and rhythmic movements as solutions to optimal control problems with
different boundary conditions. Our view of the difference between discrete and rhythmic
movements is consistent with this idea. In this framework, rhythmicity is not the consequence
of a continuous, autonomous dynamics, but of a discrete, periodic guidance. It should be
noted that the transition between rhythmic and discrete movements observed around 1 Hz in
the model does not correspond to a qualitative change in behavior (e.g. a bifurcation). A
velocity threshold was used to detect "artificial" dwell periods, but in fact, the underlying
velocity pattern changed with frequency along a continuum.
44
According to the theory, the computational specificity of rhythmic movements is
related to the management of constraints, i.e. goals are defined only by positional constraints
(Equation 9). Discrete movements require a broader set of constraints for the extra demands
of termination, and accordingly, larger computational resources. This view is consistent with
the observation that the neural substrate of rhythmic movements is a subset of the neural
substrate of discrete movements (Schaal, Sternad, Osu, & Kawato, 2004).
What makes the theory work?
The first principle (optimal feedback control) is responsible for the basic machinery of motor
control (Todorov & Jordan, 2002) and the present model adds nothing specific to this point.
The second principle (receding horizon) imposes a strong constraint on movement
production: movements comply with a universal relationship between duration and jerkiness
(Salmond et al., 2017; Shmuelof et al., 2012). Avoiding the production of unrealistic
movements (e.g. smooth long-duration movements) probably contributes to the performance
of the theory. The third principle is more enigmatic. It was adopted to explain velocity
fluctuations during slow movements (Guigon et al., 2019) and seems effective to specify the
kinematics and duration of a large class of movements. In fact, updating of goals at ~8 Hz is
equally efficient to produce point-to-point movements of different durations and arbitrary
drawing movements, and account for their properties (scaling law, speed/accuracy tradeoffs,
power laws). The reason for this is unclear but it is satisfying to note that no additional
hypothesis was needed to extend the model beyond the scope of slow movements.
Relation to previous models
The current theory is based on two concepts (intermittency, receding horizon) which are used
in the modeling framework developed by Bye and Neilson (2008, 2010). In their formalism,
intermittency corresponds to successive 100-ms refractory periods. During a refractory
45
period, processing of incoming information is delayed to the next period and a trajectory
between predicted initial state and predicted target state is planned over a variable horizon. At
the end of the refractory period, the planned trajectory is executed and a new refractory
period starts in parallel. Accordingly, an action consists in a concatenated sequence of fixed
duration submovements. Depending on the task, the variable horizon is either a receding
horizon or a fixed horizon. For instance, a fixed horizon is used in tasks calling for temporal
and spatial accuracy. On the one hand, our theory agrees with the view of Bye and Neilson
that intermittent processes at a 100-ms time scale (close to ! ) are fundamental in motor
!
control. For Bye and Neilson, the rationale for intermittency is to account for the well-
documented psychological refractory period (Pashler, 1994). We could endorse this view
since we have no independent reason for intermittency except that it helps accounting for the
characteristics of kinematic fluctuations (Guigon et al., 2019). On the other hand, there is a
clear difference between the variable horizon of Bye and Neilson which can be either a fixed
or a receding horizon, is task-dependent, and varies as a parameter, and our receding horizon
which is task-independent and is not a varying parameter. Bye and Neilson (2008) have
shown that logarithmic and linear speed-accuracy tradeoffs rely on receding and fixed
horizon control, respectively. In contrast, all speed-accuracy tradeoffs and their associated
kinematics emerge from receding horizon control in our modeling framework.
Limitations of the theory
A limitation of the theory is the versatility in task representation (series of goals, nature of
boundary conditions) afforded by the third computational principle. A series of goals could
be chosen by hand to obtain any desired motor behavior. Playing with all available states
(and not solely position and velocity) would still increase the size of the space of
representations. Thus, although the model has no free parameters, an open question is
46
whether extended variations in implementation details and in the nature of noise are
necessary to guarantee its explanatory power. A summary of all the simulations is given in
Table 2. Several patterns appear. First, the full-state constraint applies to discrete point-to-
point movements (gray lines). For these movements, partial constraints on the position or
velocity of via-points lead to poorer results. The value method plays no specific role except
for discrete Fitts’ law. We could remove this notion and consider only the zero-value method.
Second, continuous and rhythmic movements (white lines) involve the partial-position
constraint and poorer results were obtained with other types of constraint. Third, the goal
setting policy is a relevant dimension for discrete movements. Fourth, signal-dependent
motor noise is central to movement variability although temporal noise is also required to
explain temporal variability.
Another limitation is related to the (im)possibility to falsify the theory. We have
presented all what the theory can explain, but what about aspects that cannot be explained?
We have not found any property that we have tried to reproduce and for which we have
obtained a wrong prediction. Yet as neither a confirmation bias nor bad faith can be definitely
excluded, we need to be careful on this issue.
The scope of the theory is not known precisely. Although the theory was developed
exclusively in relation to movements of the upper limbs, there is no reason why it would not
apply to other bodily movements (leg, trunk, head, face, ...). Yet it is unclear how a task like
locomotion can be cast in the proposed framework. It is also unclear whether it could apply to
eye movements. Saccades share a number of properties with limb movements (kinematics,
scaling laws, Fitts’ law) and are successfully modeled in the framework of optimal control
(Harris & Wolpert, 1998, 2006; Saeb, Weber, & Triesch, 2011; van Beers, 2008). However,
47
there is a striking absence of isochrony in saccade production13 which appears incompatible
with the principles of the theory.
By construction, the theory leaves no room for a role of stiffness in the production of
movements. As in many other computational models, the role of stiffness is thought to be
restricted to a contribution to the compensation of external perturbations. Yet this view does
not acknowledge the complex and refined contribution of stiffness to motor control (Burdet,
Osu, Franklin, Milner, & Kawato, 2001). Recent models have attempted to give a more
precise account of the role of stiffness in the framework of optimal control models (Berret &
Jean, 2020; Mitrovic, Klanke, Osu, Kawato, & Vijayakumar, 2010).
Debates on motor control
The debate about motor control has a large spectrum, but has in fact been centered on two
Shakespearian dilemma: To control or not to control? To model or not to model? At one end
of the spectrum, an ensemble of theoretical constructs (named below DA, dynamical
approach) based on the ecological approach of Gibson (1966, 1986), physical theories of
self-organized pattern formation (Haken, 1983) and dynamical system theory (Strogatz,
1994) claim that neither a centralized control nor a centralized representation are necessary
for motor coordination, and behavioral motor patterns emerge from abstract,
phenomenological nonlinear dynamics corresponding to interactions between the brain, the
body and the environment (Kelso, 1995; Warren, 2006). At the other end, the computational
approach views the nervous system (or part of it) as a computing device that builds models
of the body and the environment, and controls changes in body states to achieve goals in the
environment (Kawato, 1999; Todorov & Jordan, 2002). In between, the Passive Motion
13 Yet, other eye movements such as eyelid movements (Evinger, Shaw, Peck, Manning, &
Baker, 1984) and saccades without gaze-evoked blinks (Powers, Basso, & Evinger, 2013) are
isochronous.
48
Paradigm14 (PMP; Mohan & Morasso, 2011) combines classical feedback control and
forward modeling, the Equilibrium Point Theory (EPT; Feldman & Levin, 1995) is closely
related to classical feedback control theory15, but denies the existence of internal models, and
the Active Inference theory (AIT) exploits the notion of internal (generative) model, but
views motor control as an inference problem rather than a control problem (Friston, 2011).
Available discussions have in general been restricted to these dilemma, and have failed to
provide decisive, convincing arguments for or against a particular theory.
Interestingly, a line of reasoning based on the distinction between position and force
control (Ostry & Feldman, 2003) lead to sharper and less consensual arguments. On the one
hand, models of movement control based on the direct specification of forces fail to properly
take into account the existence of posture-stabilizing mechanisms (von Holst & Mittelstaedt,
1950/1973), and incorrectly predict patterns of muscular coactivation for postural
maintenance following a displacement (Ostry & Feldman, 2003). On the other hand,
production of movement based on position control is intrinsically compatible with postural
control as a direct consequence of a postural resetting mechanism (Feldman & Levin, 1995).
In DA, EPT, PMP and AIT, the basic unified mechanism of movement production and
postural control is determined by an autonomous dynamical system, and is based on a local
fixed-point dynamics16, i.e. a restoring force17 is exerted which is a function of the distance to
a (static or moving) equilibrium point with a constant or state-dependent (possibly nonlinear)
gain (stiffness). This description fits with the notion of position control. According to these
theories, postural maintenance should correspond to such fixed-point dynamics. Yet, there is
14 Whether the PMP should be considered as a "computational" method or not is discussed in
Mohan and Morasso (2011).
15 The control theoretical framework is not intrinsically incompatible with "non-
computational" approaches, e.g. some dynamical models can be cast in terms of the control
theory (Sternad, 2000, pp 415-416).
16 In the dynamical approach, the dynamics can also be governed by a limit-cycle attractor.
17 In most cases, a second-order dynamics is used which allows to use the term "force". Yet
this term is not quite appropriate for an abstract dynamics.
49
strong evidence that posture cannot be uniquely described by this kind of process. For whole
body posture, ankle stiffness is in general too low to guarantee passive stabilization, which
calls for the existence of an active, predictive postural control mechanism (Amiri & Kearney,
2020; Bottaro, Casadio, Morasso, & Sanguineti, 2005; Casadio, Morasso, & Sanguineti,
2005; Loram, Kelly, & Lakie, 2001; Loram & Lakie, 2002; Morasso & Schieppati, 1999;
Morasso & Sanguineti, 2002). Studies on the manual stabilization of unstable objects
revealed two strategies: a high-stiffness strategy and a low-stiffness, intermittent, predictive
strategy (Lakie, Caplan, & Loram, 2003; Saha & Morasso, 2012). These observations
indicate that theories based on position control would need to be amended to account for the
need of predictive control, which in fact would violate their very principles. The
computational approach is less sensitive to this debate between position and force control
because it is versatile and can be cast in different ways, e.g. as predictive control of a
positional variable (Guigon, 2010).
The ultimate goal of a theorist is, on the one hand, to design an overarching theory in
his field of research and, one the other hand, to elaborate an argumentative discourse that
supports his theory and can dismiss alternative, concurrent proposals. Although the two tasks
are important on their own, the latter should not be used shamelessly to conceal difficulties in
the former. At its inception (Kugler, Kelso, & Turvey, 1980), the dynamical approach was
conceived as a formal alternative to the cognitive/information-processing theory of action,
but with no proper content. With the advent of the finger "wipers" task (Kelso, 1984; Kelso,
Holt, Rubin, & Kugler, 1981), ensuing modeling (Haken, Kelso, & Bunz, 1985) and later
developments (review in Beek, Peper, & Stegeman, 1995; Kelso, 1995), the dynamical
approach became a well-established theory of action encompassing behavioral and neural
levels (Jirsa, Friedrich, Haken, & Kelso, 1994; Schöner, 1990, 1994). Yet its explanatory
power remains largely limited to variations around the original task (Sternad, 1998, 2000).
50
Recent works (Huys et al., 2014; Warren, 2006) involved long arguments and long
methodological developments, but produced little insights outside the historical scope of the
theory. In the meantime, several critical issues remain unsolved. The first issue is related to
the possibility that common principles apply to rhythmic and discrete actions (Beek et al.,
1995; Daffertshofer, van Veen, Ton, & Huys, 2014). The second issue concerns the lack of a
general method to guide the design of a dynamical system for reproducing a given behavior
(Ijspeert, Nakanishi, Hoffmann, Pastor, & Schaal, 2013). A possible solution would be to use
computational tools (optimization, machine learning techniques) to discover or learn
appropriate dynamics (Ijspeert et al., 2013; Schaal, Mohajerian, & Ijspeert, 2007), but it is
not in the spirit of the dynamical approach. The third issue is related to the very nature of
emergent trajectories defined in general in an abstract space (e.g. relative phase in Haken et
al., 1985; but for a definition in task or body space, see Haken et al. 1985; Saltzman & Kelso,
1987; Schaal et al., 2007) and how they can be translated into actual displacements of a
necessarily mechanical object (e.g. a finger). The trajectories should thus be considered as an
input to a trajectory-following system. At this stage, the difficulty is not solely related to the
lack of flexibility of trajectory-based control (Schaal et al., 2007), but more deeply to the fact
that remaining redundancies below the level of trajectory definition (e.g. in muscle or neural
space) are neither considered nor exploited (Todorov & Jordan, 2002). The fourth issue is the
intrinsic temporal and spatial invariance of the solutions of autonomous dynamical systems
which can be interesting in robotics (Schaal et al., 2007), but is not consistent with human
motor behavior (Gentner, 1987; Smith, Goffman, Zelaznik, Ying, & McGillem, 1995). The
last two issues also apply to the Equilibrium-Point Theory (Feldman & Levin, 1995) and the
Active Inference theory (Friston, 2011; Friston et al., 2011) since they are cast in terms of a
trajectory-following problem. The Passive Motion Paradigm is by construction more
computational and versatile than DA, EPT and AIT, and in fact, by different aspects, not so
51
far from optimal control models (Mohan & Morasso, 2011). Yet this theory would need to be
further develop toward an overarching account of motor control.
Conclusion
In keeping with the theory of Todorov and Jordan (2002), the present theory explains
characteristics of motor control as by-products of computational principles (optimal feedback
control, receding horizon, task representation by a series of goals). None of the principles is
new (Guigon et al., 2019; Todorov & Jordan, 2002), but their assemblage in an overarching
theory of motor control is new. These principles are sufficient to provide a detailed account
of a large set of motor behaviors (discrete, continuous, rhythmic and timing actions) and
properties (scaling laws, power laws, speed-accuracy tradeoffs). The theory significantly
extends our understanding of action production in the framework of control theory.
52
Tables
Time Explanation
Δ duration of a simulation
! current time during the simulation
! timestep of the simulation — for numerical integration
! receding horizon — in the model the value of ! is constant (0.28 s)
! !
! fixed horizon — used only to contrast with the receding horizon
!
!(!) time interval to reach a goal at time ! (Equation 1) — the value of !(!) can
be: ! (fixed horizon control); ∞ (infinite horizon control); or !+!
! !
(receding horizon control) — only the receding horizon control is used
! period at which goals are updated in the absence of temporal constraints —
!
in the model the value of ! is constant (0.13 s)
!
! period at which goals are updated in general (Figure 1C) — the value of
!"#$
! is: ! in the absence of temporal constraints; any value in the presence
!"#$ !
of temporal constraints (e.g. period of a metronome)
! times at which goals are updated (Equation 6) — ! −! = !
! (!!!,...!) !!! ! !"#$
Table 1. Summary on time notations.
exp constr var VP TA VM GS noise Fig comment
fastest full-state ! — (11) — — — 2 —
slow full-state !" (12/ — Z/C A — 3 Does not work with relative goal setting.
14) Works with partial pv constraints.
interm. full-state ! (11) (11) Z/C A/R — 4 —
drawing partial ! (9) — — A !"# 5,6 Poorer fit with partial pv and full-state
!
position constraints, and with relative goal setting.
writing partial ! (9) — — A !"# 7 Poorer fit with partial pv and full-state
!
position constraints, and with relative goal setting.
scaling full-state ! (11) (11) Z/C A — 8,9 Poorer scaling with partial p and pv
laws constraints.
R — 8,9 Loss of invariance of time to peak velocity
for partial p and pv constraints.
rhythmic partial ! — (9) — — !"# 10 Qualitatively similar results with partial pv
!
position and full-state constraints.
discrete full-state ! (11) (11) Z A !"# 11 Loss of Fitts’ law with current-value
!
Fitts method. Fundamental role of !"# .
!
R !"# 11 Loss of Fitts’ law with current-value
!
53
method.
rhythmic partial ! — (9) — — !"# 12,13 Loss of Fitts’ law with partial pv and full-
!
Fitts position state constraints.
timing full-state ! (11) (11) Z/C R ! 14,15 Importance of temporal noise to account
!
for temporal variability.
Table 2. Comparison between the simulations. constr: boundary constraint; var:
variable; !: position; !: velocity; VP: via-point; TA: target; VM: value method;
Z: zero-value; C: current-value; GS: goal setting policy; A: absolute; R: relative.
Number in parentheses refer to equations. Gray lines indicate discrete
movements.
Appendix A — Parametric study of power laws
A parametric analysis of the power laws obtained in drawing (Figure 6) has been performed.
It involved ! , ! , and the nature of boundary constraints. It shows that ! = 0.28 s,
! ! !
! = 0.13 s, and the partial-position constraint give the best fit to observed data (Figure A1),
!
which provides an independent cross-check for ! and ! .
! !
Figure A1. Parametric study of drawing power laws. A. Influence of ! for
!
! = 0.13 s and partial-position constraint: (black) ! = 0.28 s; (red) ! =
! ! !
0.18 s; (green) ! = 0.38 s; (blue) ! = 0.48 s. B. Influence of ! for
! ! !
! = 0.28 s and partial-position constraint: (black) ! = 0.13 s; (red) ! =
! ! !
0.18 s; (green) ! = 0.23 s. C. Influence of boundary constraints for ! = 0.28 s
! !
and ! = 0.13 s: (black) partial-position constraint; (red) partial-position/velocity
!
constraint with current-value method; (green) partial-position/velocity constraint
with zero-value method; (blue) full-state constraint with current-value method;
(purple) full-state constraint with zero-value method.
Appendix B — Choice of via-points
Figure B1. Via-points. A. Position of the via-points for the point-to-point
movements of Figure 8B. Absolute goal setting policy. B. Position of the via-
points for the point-to-point movements of Figure 8C. Relative goal setting
policy. (diamond) start point; (plain square) via-point; (circle) target.
54
Appendix C — Phase transition in rhythmic movements
A cardinal observation in the study of rhythmic movements is the frequency-dependent phase
transition in bimanual coordination (Kelso, 1984), i.e. synchronized, asymmetric (parallel)
finger displacements are suddenly replaced by symmetric displacements as synchronization
frequency increases. A popular explanation of this phenomenon is provided by the Haken-
Kelso-Bunz model in terms of phase transition in a parameterized nonlinear dynamical
system (Haken et al., 1985). The predictive power of this model is undeniable and striking
(Kelso, 1995), yet its special-purpose nature is a matter of concern (Ijspeert et al., 2013).
Todorov and Jordan (2002) proposed a partial account of phase transition in the framework
of optimal feedback control. They observed that in a one-dimensional sinusoidal tracking task
with a redundant, 2-dof (telescopic) arm, the phase between the first segment of the arm and
the endpoint changed abruptly with frequency (at ~2.8 Hz)18. The present theory could
endorse this view to extend its explanatory power. Yet an alternative approach can be
developed based on the notion of task representation. In the study of drawing movements, we
have shown that the fastest two-dimensional drawing defined by internally updated via-points
has 3 via-point and lasts ~0.38 s, i.e. ~2.6 Hz for repetitive drawing (Figure 5E, inset). In this
framework, the only mean to increase movement frequency is to make a one-dimensional
drawing (2 via-points). If we consider that asymmetric and symmetric patterns abstractly
correspond to 2D and 1D representations, respectively, phase transition is explained by the
necessary change of dimension to increase movement frequency. A phase transition between
drawing the figure "eight" and drawing the figure "zero" has been described by Buchanan,
Kelso, & Fuchs (1996) with a critical frequency between 1.2 and 1.4 Hz. In the model, the
figure "eight" can be drawn with different numbers of via-points (here from 8 to 4;
18 Experimentally measured transition frequencies vary considerably between participants
(Kelso, 1984). In Scholz, Kelso, & Schöner (1987), the range is 2-2.6 Hz.
55
Figure C1A,B,D,E). The minimum number of via-points is 4 (which can also be used to draw
the figure "zero"; Figure C1F) corresponding to a frequency of 1.89 Hz. The discrepancy
between the experimental and theoretical transition frequencies may be related to what is
considered as a proper "eight" representation. For instance, a transition could occur around
1.28 Hz, between 8 and 6 points, if the 6 points are interpreted as a "zero" rather than as a
"eight" (Figure C1A,C). Overall, this view of phase transition is consistent with the
perceptual rather than motoric nature of bimanual coordination (Mechsner, Kerzel, Knoblich,
& Prinz, 2001).
Figure C1. Via-point representations for drawing the figure "eight" and the figure
"zero" (left column) and actual drawing (right column). The starting point is
indicated by a open square, 50 turns. The actual number of via-points may be
different from the observed number of via-points since some via-points can be
used several times. Simulations with partial-position constraint, absolute goal
setting policy, in the presence of !!" (!! = 1).
!
References
Ajemian, R., & Hogan, N. (2010). Experimenting with theoretical motor neuroscience.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 42, 333–342.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00222895.2010.529332
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21184350
Al Borno, M., Vyas, S., Shenoy, K. V., & Delp, S. (2020). High-fidelity musculoskeletal
modeling reveals a motor planning contribution to the speed-accuracy tradeoff. Elife, 9,
e57021.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.57021
PMID: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33325369
Amiri, P., & Kearney, R. E. (2020). Patterns of muscle activation and modulation of ankle
intrinsic stiffness in different postural operating conditions. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 123, 743–754.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00558.2019
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31913747
Arber, S., & Costa, R. M. (2018). Connecting neuronal circuits for movement. Science,
360, 1403–1404.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aat5994
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29954969
56
Ashton, R. (1976). Aspects of timing in child development. Child Development, 47, 622–
626.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1128176
Baraduc, P., Thobois, S., Gan, J., Broussolle, E., & Desmurget, M. (2013). A common
optimization principle for motor execution in healthy subjects and parkinsonian
patients. Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 665–677.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1482-12.2013
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23303945
Baron, S., & Kleinman, D. L. (1969). The human as an optimal controller and information
processor. IEEE Transactions on Man-Machine Systems, 10, 9–17.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMMS.1969.299875
Beek, P. J., Peper, C. E., & Stegeman, D. (1995). Dynamical models of movement
coordination. Human Movement Science, 14, 573–608.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0167-9457(95)00028-5
Bennequin, D., Fuchs, R., Berthoz, A., & Flash, T. (2009). Movement timing and
invariance arise from several geometries. PLoS Computational Biology, 5, e1000426.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000426
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19593380
Berio, D., Calinon, S., & Fol Leymarie, F. (2017). Generating calligraphic trajectories
with model predictive control. In Proceedings 43rd Conference on Graphics Interface
(pp. 132–139). Edmonton, Alberta, Canada: Canadian Human-Computer
Communications Society School of Computer Science.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.20380/GI2017.17
Bernstein, N. (1967). The co-ordination and regulation of movements. Oxford, England:
Pergamon Press.
Berret, B., & Jean, F. (2020). Stochastic optimal open-loop control as a theory of force
and impedance planning via muscle co-contraction. PLoS Computational Biology, 16,
e1007414.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007414
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32109941
Biess, A., Nagurka, M., & Flash, T. (2006). Simulating discrete and rhythmic multi-joint
human arm movements by optimization of nonlinear performance indices. Biological
Cybernetics, 95, 31–53.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00422-006-0067-7
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16699783
Binet, A., & Courtier, J. (1893). Sur la vitesse des mouvements graphiques. Revue
Philosophique, 35, 664–671.
Bongers, R. M., Fernandez, L., & Bootsma, R. J. (2009). Linear and logarithmic speed-
accuracy trade-offs in reciprocal aiming result from task-specific parameterization of an
57
invariant underlying dynamics. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 35, 1443–1457.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015783
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19803648
Bottaro, A., Casadio, M., Morasso, P. G., & Sanguineti, V. (2005). Body sway during
quiet standing: Is it the residual chattering of an intermittent stabilization process?
Human Movement Science, 24, 588–615.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2005.07.006
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16143414
Boyle, J. B., & Shea, C. H. (2013). Micro-movements of varying difficulties: Wrist and
arm movements. Experimental Brain Research, 229, 61–73.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-013-3590-5
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23732949
Bryan, W. L. (1892). On the development of voluntary motor ability. American Journal of
Psychology, 5, 125–204.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1410865
Bryson, A. E. (1999). Dynamic optimization. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall.
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780201361872
Bryson, A. E., & Ho, Y.-C. (1975). Applied optimal control - Optimization, estimation,
and control. New York, NY, USA: Hemisphere Publ Corp
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780891162285
Buchanan, J. J. (2013). Flexibility in the control of rapid aiming actions. Experimental
Brain Research, 229, 47–60.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-013-3589-y
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23760281
Buchanan, J. J., Kelso, J. A. S., & Fuchs, A. (1996). Coordination dynamics of trajectory
formation. Biological Cybernetics, 74, 41–54.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s004220050217
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8573652
Bullock, D., & Grossberg, S. (1988). Neural dynamics of planned arm movements:
Emergent invariance and speed-accuracy properties during trajectory formation.
Psychological Review, 95, 49–90.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.1.49
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3281179
Bullock, D., Grossberg, S., & Mannes, C. (1993). A neural network model for cursive
script production. Biological Cybernetics, 70, 15–28.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00202562
Burdet, E., Osu, R., Franklin, D. W., Milner, T. E, &, Kawato, M. (2001). The central
nervous system stabilizes unstable dynamics by learning optimal impedance. Nature,
414, 446–449
58
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/35106566
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11719805
Bye R. T., & Neilson, P. D. (2008). The BUMP model of response planning: Variable
horizon predictive control accounts for the speed-accuracy tradeoffs and velocity
profiles of aimed movement. Human Movement Science, 27, 771–798.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2008.04.003
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18774616
Bye, R. T., & Neilson, P. D. (2010). The BUMP model of response planning: Intermittent
predictive control accounts for 10 Hz physiological tremor. Human Movement Science,
29, 713–736.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2010.01.006
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20674054
Caligiuri, M. P. (1987). Labial kinematics during speech in patients with parkinsonian
rigidity. Brain, 110, 1033–1044.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/110.4.1033
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3651793
Casadio, M., Morasso, P. G., & Sanguineti, V. (2005). Direct measurement of ankle
stiffness during quiet standing: Implications for control modelling and clinical
application. Gait Posture, 21, 410–424.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2004.05.005
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15886131
Churchland, M. M., Afshar, A., & Shenoy, K. V. (2006). A central source of movement
variability. Neuron, 52, 1085–1096.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.034
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17178410
Connor, N. P., Abbs, J. H., Cole, K. J., & Gracco, V. L. (1989). Parkinsonian deficits in
serial multiarticulate movements for speech. Brain, 112, 997–1009.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/112.4.997
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2775998
Cos, I., Girard, B., & Guigon, E. (2015). Balancing out dwelling and moving: Optimal
sensorimotor synchronization. Journal of Neurophysiology, 114, 146–158.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00175.2015
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25878154
Craig, C., Pepping, G. J., & Grealy, M. (2005). Intercepting beats in predesignated target
zones. Experimental Brain Research, 165, 490–504.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-005-2322-x
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15912367
Daffertshofer, A., van Veen, B., Ton, R., & Huys, R. (2014). Discrete and rhythmic
movements - Just a bifurcation apart? In Proceeding IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics (pp. 778–783). San Diego, CA, USA: IEEE.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SMC.2014.6974005
59
Darling, W. G., Cole, K. J., & Abbs, J. H. (1988). Kinematic variability of grasp
movements as a function of practice and movement speed. Experimental Brain
Research, 73, 225–235.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00248215
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3215301
Degallier, S., & Ijspeert, A. (2010). Modeling discrete and rhythmic movements through
motor primitives: A review. Biological Cybernetics, 103, 319–338.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00422-010-0403-9
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20697734
Degallier, S., Righetti, L., Natale, L., Nori, F., Metta, G., & Ijspeert, A. J. (2008). A
modular bio-inspired architecture for movement generation for the infant-like robot
iCub. In Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE RAS/EMBS International Conference on
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (pp. 795–800). Scottsdale, AZ, USA: IEEE
Press.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/BIOROB.2008.4762847
Denier van der Gon, J. J., & Thuring, J. P. (1965). The guiding of human writing
movements. Kybernetik, 2, 145–148.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00272310
de Rugy A., & Sternad, D. (2003). Interaction between discrete and rhythmic movements:
Reaction time and phase of discrete movement initiation against oscillatory
movements. Brain Research, 994, 160–174.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2003.09.031
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14642641
Diedrichsen, J., Shadmehr, R., & Ivry, R. B. (2010). The coordination of movement:
Optimal feedback control and beyond. Trends in Cognitive Science, 14, 31–39.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.11.004
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20005767
Doeringer, J. A., & Hogan, N. (1998). Intermittency in preplanned elbow movements
persists in the absence of visual feedback. Journal of Neurophysiology, 80, 1787–1799.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.1998.80.4.1787
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9772239
Donnet, S., Bartolo, R., Fernandes, J. M., Cunha, J. P., Prado, L., & Merchant, H. (2014).
Monkeys time their pauses of movement and not their movement-kinematics during a
synchronization-continuation rhythmic task. Journal of Neurophysiology, 111, 2138–
2149.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00802.2013
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24572098
Edelman, S., & Flash, T. (1987). A model of handwriting. Biological Cybernetics, 57, 25–
36.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00318713
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3620543
60
Evinger, C., Shaw, M. D., Peck, C. K., Manning, K. A., & Baker R. (1984). Blinking and
associated eye movements in humans, guinea pigs, and rabbits. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 52, 323–339.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.1984.52.2.323
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6481436
Faulkner, A., & Rosen, S. (1999). Contributions of temporal encodings of voicing,
voicelessness, fundamental frequency, and amplitude variation to audio-visual and
auditory speech perception. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106, 2063–
2073.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.427951
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10530029
Feldman, A. G., & Levin, M. F. (1995). The origin and use of positional frames of
reference in motor control. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18, 723–806.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0004070X
Feldman, A. G., & Meijer, O. G. (1999). Bernstein’s heritage. Discovering the right
questions in motor control: Movements (1929). Motor Control, 3, 105–134.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1123/mcj.3.2.105
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10198145
Fitts, P. M. (1954). The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the
amplitude of movement. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, 381–391.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0055392
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13174710
Flash, T., & Hogan, N. (1985). The coordination of arm movements: An experimentally
confirmed mathematical model. Journal of Neuroscience, 5, 1688–1703.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.05-07-01688.1985
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4020415
Flash, T., Meirovitch, Y., & Barliya A. (2013). Models of human movement: Trajectory
planning and inverse kinematics studies. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61, 330–
339.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2012.09.020
Friston, K. (2011). What is optimal about motor control? Neuron, 72, 488–498.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.10.018
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22078508
Friston, K., Mattout, J., & Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and active inference.
Biological Cybernetics, 104, 137–160.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00422-011-0424-z
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21327826
Ganesh, G., Haruno, M., Kawato, M., & Burdet, E. (2010). Motor memory and local
minimization of error and effort, not global optimization, determine motor behavior.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 104, 382–390.
61
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.01058.2009
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20484533
Garcia, C., Prett, D., & Morari, M. (1989). Model predictive control: Theory and practice -
A survey. Automatica, 25, 335–348.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0005-1098(89)90002-2
Gentner, D. R. (1987). Timing of skilled motor performance: Tests of the proportional
duration model. Psychological Review, 94, 255–276.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.94.2.255
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston, MA, USA:
Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780395044940
Gibson, J. J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA, USA:
Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780898599596
Gilet, E., Diard, J., & Bessière, P. (2011). Bayesian action-perception computational
model: Interaction of production and recognition of cursive letters. PLoS One, 6,
e20387.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0020387
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21674043
Glencross, D. J. (1975). The effects of changes in task conditions in the temporal
organization of a repetitive speed skill. Ergonomics, 18, 18–27.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00140137508931436
Gordon, J., Ghilardi, M. F., Cooper, S. E., & Ghez, C. (1994). Accuracy of planar
reaching movements. II. Systematic extent errors resulting from inertial anisotropy.
Experimental Brain Research, 99, 112–130.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00241416
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7925785
Guiard, Y. (1993). On Fitts’s and Hooke’s laws: Simple harmonic movement in upper-
limb cyclical aiming. Acta Psychologica (Amsterdam), 82, 139–159.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0001-6918(93)90009-G
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8475763
Guigon, E., Baraduc, P., & Desmurget, M. (2008a). Computational motor control:
Feedback and accuracy. European Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 1003–1016.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06028.x
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18279368
Guigon, E., Baraduc, P., & Desmurget, M. (2008b). Optimality, stochasticity, and
variability in motor behavior. Journal of Computational Neuroscience, 24, 57–68.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10827-007-0041-y
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18202922
62
Guigon, E. (2010). Active control of bias for the control of posture and movement.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 104, 1090–1102.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00162.2010
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20538773
Guigon, E. (2011). Models and architectures for motor control: Simple or complex?. In F.
Danion & M. L. Latash (Eds.), Motor control: Theories, experiments, and applications
(pp. 478–502). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780195395273
Guigon, E., Chafik, O., Jarrassé, N., & Roby-Brami, A. (2019). Experimental and
theoretical study of velocity fluctuations during slow movements in humans. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 121, 715–727.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00576.2018
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30649981
Haken, H. (1983). Synergetics: An introduction: Nonequilibrium phase transitions and
self-organization in physics, chemistry, and biology (3rd rev. ed.). Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-88338-5
Haken, H., Kelso, J. A. S., & Bunz, H. (1985). A theoretical model of phase transitions in
human hand movements. Biological Cybernetics, 51, 347–356.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00336922
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3978150
Harris, C. M., & Wolpert, D. M. (1998). Signal-dependent noise determines motor
planning. Nature, 394, 780–784.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/29528
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9723616
Harris, C. M., & Wolpert, D. M. (2006). The main sequence of saccades optimizes speed-
accuracy trade-off. Biological Cybernetics, 95, 21–29.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00422-006-0064-x
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16555070
Hatze, H. (1976). The complete optimization of a human motion. Mathematical
Bioscience, 28, 99–135.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0025-5564(76)90098-5
Heath, M., Westwood, D. A., & Binsted, G. (2004). The control of memory-guided
reaching movements in peripersonal space. Motor Control, 8, 76–106.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1123/mcj.8.1.76
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14973339
Heath, M., Neely, K., & Krigolson, O. (2008). Response modes influence the accuracy of
monocular and binocular reaching movements. Motor Control, 12, 252–266.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1123/mcj.12.3.252
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18698109
63
Hoff, B. (1994). A model of duration in normal and perturbed reaching movement.
Biological Cybernetics, 71, 481–488.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00198466
Hoff, B., & Arbib, M. A. (1992). A model of the effect of speed, accuracy, and
perturbation on visually guided reaching. In R. Caminiti, P. B. Johnson PB, & Y.
Burnod (Eds.), Control of arm movement in space. Neurophysiological and
computational approaches (pp. 285–306). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9783540550549
Hoffman, D. S., & Strick, P. L. (1986). Step-tracking movements of the wrist in humans.
I. Kinematic analysis. Journal of Neuroscience 6, 3309–3318.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.06-11-03309.1986
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3772433
Hogan, N. (1984). An organizing principle for a class of voluntary movements. Journal of
Neuroscience, 4, 2745–2754.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.04-11-02745.1984
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6502203
Hogan, N., & Sternad, D. (2007). On rhythmic and discrete movements: Reflections,
definitions and implications for motor control. Experimental Brain Research, 181, 13–
30.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-007-0899-y
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17530234
Hollerbach, J. M. (1981). An oscillation theory of handwriting. Biological Cybernetics,
39, 139–156.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00336740
Hove, M. J., & Keller, P. E. (2010). Spatiotemporal relations and movement trajectories in
visuomotor synchronization. Music Perception, 28, 15–26.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1525/mp.2010.28.1.15
Howarth, C. I., Beggs, W. D. A., & Bowden, J. M. (1971). The relationship between speed
and accuracy of movement aimed at a target. Acta Psychologica (Amsterdam), 35, 207–
218.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0001-6918(71)90022-9
Huh, D., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2015). Spectrum of power laws for curved hand movements.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112,
E3950–E3958.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1510208112
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26150514
Huys, R., Studenka, B. E., Rheaume, N. L., Zelaznik, H. N., & Jirsa, V. K. (2008).
Distinct timing mechanisms produce discrete and continuous movements. PLoS
Computational Biology, 4, e1000061.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000061
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18437236
64
Huys, R., Fernandez, L., Bootsma, R. J., & Jirsa, V. K. (2010). Fitts’ law is not continuous
in reciprocal aiming. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
Science, 277, 1179–1184.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2009.1954
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20018791
Huys, R., Perdikis, D., & Jirsa V. K. (2014). Functional architectures and structured flows
on manifolds: A dynamical framework for motor behavior. Psycholological Review,
121, 302–336
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037014
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25090422
Ijspeert, A. J., Nakanishi, J., Hoffmann, H., Pastor, P., & Schaal, S. (2013). Dynamical
movement primitives: Learning attractor models for motor behaviors. Neural
Computation, 25, 328–373.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00393
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23148415
Jean, F., & Berret, B. (2017). On the duration of human movement: From self-paced to
slow/fast reaches up to Fitts’s law. In J.-P. Laumond, N. Mansard, & J.-B. Lasserre
(Eds.), Geometric and numerical foundations of movements (pp. 43–65). Cham,
Switzerland: Springer.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51547-2_3
Jeannerod, M. (1984). The timing of natural prehension movements. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 16, 235–254.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00222895.1984.10735319
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15151851
Jirsa, V. K., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2005). The excitator as a minimal model for the
coordination dynamics of discrete and rhythmic movement generation. Journal of
Motor Behavior, 37, 35–51.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.3200/JMBR.37.1.35-51
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15642691
Jirsa, V. K., Friedrich, R., Haken, H., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1994). A theoretical model of
phase transitions in the human brain. Biological Cybernetics, 71, 27–35.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s004220050065
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8054384
Jones, K. E., Hamilton, A. F. C., & Wolpert, D. M. (2002). Sources of signal-dependent
noise during isometric force production. Journal of Neurophysiology, 88, 1533–1544.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.2002.88.3.1533
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12205173
Kawato, M. (1999). Internal models for motor control and trajectory planning. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 9, 718–727.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(99)00028-8
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10607637
65
Kelso, J. A. S. (1984). Phase transitions and critical behavior in human bimanual
coordination. American Journal of Physiology, 246, R1000–R1004.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1984.246.6.R1000
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6742155
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The self-organization of brain and behavior.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780262611312
Kelso, J. A. S., Holt, K. G., Rubin, P., & Kugler, P. N. (1981). Patterns of human
interlimb coordination emerge from the properties of non-linear, limit cycle oscillatory
processes: Theory and data. Journal of Motor Behavior, 13, 226–261.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00222895.1981.10735251
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15215072
Khan, M. A., Elliot, D., Coull, J., Chua, R., & Lyons J. (2002). Optimal control strategies
under different feedback schedules: Kinematic evidence. Journal of Motor Behavior,
34, 45–57.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00222890209601930
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11880249
Kodl, J., Ganesh, G., & Burdet E. (2011). The CNS stochastically selects motor plan
utilizing extrinsic and intrinsic representations. PLoS One, 6, e24229.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0024229
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21912679
Krüger, M., Eggert, T., & Straube, A. (2011). Joint angle variability in the time course of
reaching movements. Clinical Neurophysiology, 122, 759–766.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2010.10.003
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21030301
Krüger, M., Straube, A., & Eggert, T. (2017). The propagation of movement variability in
time: A methodological approach for discrete movements with multiple degrees of
freedom. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 11, 93.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2017.00093
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29081743
Kugler, P. N., Kelso, J. A. S., & Turvey, M. T. (1980). On the concept of coordinative
structures as dissipative structures: I. Theoretical lines of convergence. In G. E.
Stelmach, & J. Requin (Eds.), Tutorials in motor behavior, Vol 1 (pp. 3–47).
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4115(08)61936-6
Lacquaniti, F., Terzuolo, C., & Viviani, P. (1983). The law relating the kinematic and
figural aspects of drawing movements. Acta Psychologica (Amsterdam), 54, 115–130.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0001-6918(83)90027-6
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6666647
66
Lakie, M., Caplan, N., & Loram, I. D. (2003). Human balancing of an inverted pendulum
with a compliant linkage: Neural control by anticipatory intermittent bias. Journal of
Physiology (London), 551, 357–370.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2002.036939
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12832494
Lashley, K. S. (1951). The problem of serial order in behavior. In L. A. Jeffress (Ed.),
Cerebral mechanisms of behavior (pp. 112–136). New York, NY, USA: John Wiley &
Sons.
Levy-Tzedek, S., Ben Tov, M., & Karniel, A. (2011). Rhythmic movements are larger and
faster but with the same frequency on removal of visual feedback. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 106, 2120–2126.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00266.2011
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21813746
Liu, D., & Todorov, E. (2007). Evidence for the flexible sensorimotor strategies predicted
by optimal feedback control. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 9354–9368.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1110-06.2007
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17728449
Loram, I. D., Kelly, S. M., & Lakie, M. (2001). Human balancing of an inverted
pendulum: Is sway size controlled by ankle impedance? Journal of Physiology
(London), 532, 879–891.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.0879e.x
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11313453
Loram, I. D., & Lakie, M. (2002). Direct measurement of human ankle stiffness during
quiet standing: The intrinsic mechanical stiffness is insufficient for stability. Journal of
Physiology (London), 545, 1041–1053.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2002.025049
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12482906
MacKenzie, C. L., Marteniuk, R. G., Dugas, C., Liske, D., & Eckmeier, B. (1987). Three
dimensional movement trajectories in Fitts’ task: Implications for control. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology A, 39, 629–647.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14640748708401806
Martin, V., Reimann, H., & Schöner, G. (2019). A process account of the uncontrolled
manifold structure of joint space variance in pointing movements. Biological
Cybernetics, 113, 293–307.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00422-019-00794-w
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30771072
Mechsner, F., Kerzel, D., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2001). Perceptual basis of bimanual
coordination. Nature, 414, 69–73.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/35102060
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11689944
67
Meijer, O. G., & Bruijn, S. M. (2007). The loyal dissident: N.A. Bernstein and the double-
edged sword of Stalinism. Journal of the History of the Neurosciences, 16, 206–224.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09647040600720979
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17365565
Messier, J., & Kalaska, J. F. (1999). Comparison of variability of initial kinematics and
endpoints of reaching movements. Experimental Brain Research, 125, 139–152.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002210050669
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10204767
Meulenbroek, R. G., Rosenbaum, D. A., Thomassen, A. J., Loukopoulos, L. D., &
Vaughan, J. (1996). Adaptation of a reaching model to handwriting: How different
effectors can produce the same written output, and other results. Psychological
Research, 59, 64–74.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00419834
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8693052
Meyer, D. E., Abrams, R. A., Kornblum, S., Wright, C. E., & Smith J. E. K. (1988).
Optimality in human motor performance: Ideal control of rapid aimed movement.
Psychological Review, 95, 340–370.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.95.3.340
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3406245
Mitrovic, D., Klanke, S., Osu, R., Kawato, M., & Vijayakumar, S. (2010). A
computational model of limb impedance control based on principles of internal model
uncertainty. PLoS One, 5, e13601.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0013601
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21049061
Mohan, V., & Morasso, P. (2011). Passive motion paradigm: An alternative to optimal
control. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 5, 4.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnbot.2011.00004
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22207846
Mohan, V., Bhat, A., & Morasso, P. (2019). Muscleless motor synergies and actions
without movements: From motor neuroscience to cognitive robotics. Physics of Life
Review, 30, 89–111.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.04.005
Morasso, P., & Mussa-Ivaldi, F. A. (1982). Trajectory formation and handwriting: A
computational model. Biological Cybernetics, 45, 131–142.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00335240
PMID: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7138957
Morasso, P., Mussa-Ivaldi, F. A., & Ruggiero, C. (1983). How a discontinuous mechanism
can produce continuous patterns in trajectory formation and handwriting. Acta
Psychologica (Amsterdam), 54, 83–98.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0001-6918(83)90025-2
68
Morasso, P. G., & Schieppati, M. (1999). Can muscle stiffness alone stabilize upright
standing? Journal of Neurophysiology, 82, 1622–1626.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.1999.82.3.1622
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10482776
Morasso, P. G., & Sanguineti, V. (2002). Ankle muscle stiffness alone cannot stabilize
balance during quiet standing. Journal of Neurophysiology, 88, 2157–2162.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.2002.88.4.2157
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12364538
Mosier, K. M., Scheidt, R. A., Acosta, S., & Mussa-Ivaldi, F. A. (2005). Remapping hand
movements in a novel geometrical environment. Journal of Neurophysiology, 94,
4362–4372.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00380.2005
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16148276
Nelson, W. L. (1983). Physical principles for economies of skilled movements. Biological
Cybernetics, 46, 135–147.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00339982
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6838914
Ostry, D. J., & Feldman, A. G. (2003). A critical evaluation of the force control hypothesis
in motor control. Experimental Brain Research, 153, 275–288.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-003-1624-0
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14610628
Osu, R., Morishige, K., Nakanishi, J., Miyamoto, H., & Kawato, M. (2015). Practice
reduces task relevant variance modulation and forms nominal trajectory. Scientific
Reports, 5, 17659.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep17659
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26639942
Pashler, H. (1994). Dual-task interference in simple tasks: Data and theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 116, 220–244
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.116.2.220
PMID: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7972591
Pélisson, D., Prablanc, C., Goodale, M. A., & Jeannerod, M. (1986). Visual control of
reaching movements without vision of the limb. II. Evidence of fast unconscious
processes correcting the trajectory of the hand to the final position of a double-step
stimulus. Experimental Brain Research, 62, 303–311.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00238849
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3709715
Perdikis, D., Huys, R., & Jirsa, V. K. (2011). Time scale hierarchies in the functional
organization of complex behaviors. PLoS Computational Biology, 7, e1002198.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002198
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21980278
69
Poletti, C., Sleimen-Malkoun, R., Temprado, J.-J., & Lemaire, P. (2015). Older and
younger adults’ strategies in sensorimotor tasks: Insights from Fitts’ pointing task.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 41, 542–555.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000033
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25751042
Port, N. L., Lee, D., Dassonville, P., & Georgopoulos, A. P. (1997). Manual interception
of moving targets: I. Performance and movement initiation. Experimental Brain
Research, 116, 406–420.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/PL00005769
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9372290
Powers, A. S., Basso, M. A., & Evinger, C. (2013). Blinks slow memory-guided saccades.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 109, 734–741.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00746.2012
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23155174
Qian, N., Jiang, Y., Jiang, Z. P., & Mazzoni, P. (2013). Movement duration, Fitts’s law,
and an infinite-horizon optimal feedback control model for biological motor systems.
Neural Computation, 25, 697–724.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00410
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23272916
Rieger, M. (2007). The role of goal representations in moving to temporal and spatial
targets. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology (Hove), 60, 262–288.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470210600760250
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17455058
Rigoux, L., & Guigon, E. (2012). A model of reward- and effort-based optimal decision
making and motor control. PLoS Computational Biology, 8, e1002716
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002716
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23055916
Ronsse, R., Sternad, D., & Lefèvre, P. (2009). A computational model for rhythmic and
discrete movements in uni- and bimanual coordination. Neural Computation, 21, 1335–
1370.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1162/neco.2008.03-08-720
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19018700
Saeb, S., Weber, C., & Triesch, J. (2011). Learning the optimal control of coordinated eye
and head movements. PLoS Computational Biology, 7, e1002253.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002253
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22072953
Saha, D. J., & Morasso, P. (2012). Stabilization strategies for unstable dynamics. PLoS
One, 7, e30301.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0030301
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22279580
70
Saito, H., Tsubone, T., & Wada, Y. (2006). Can human isochrony be explained by a
computational theory? Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, 2006, 4494–4497.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260819
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17946633
Sainburg, R. L, & Schaefer, S. Y. (2004). Interlimb differences in control of movement
extent. Journal of Neurophysiology, 92, 1374–1383.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00181.2004
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15115793
Salmond, L. H., Davidson, A. D., & Charles, S. K. (2017). Proximal-distal differences in
movement smoothness reflect differences in biomechanics. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 117, 1239–1257.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00712.2015
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28003410
Saltzman, E., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1987). Skilled actions: A task-dynamic approach.
Psychological Review, 94, 84–106.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.94.1.84
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3823306
Sarlegna, F., Blouin, J., Bresciani, J.-P., Bourdin, C., Vercher, J.-L., & Gauthier, G. M.
(2003). Target and hand position information in the online control of goal-directed arm
movements. Experimental Brain Research, 151, 524–535.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-003-1504-7
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12830346
Schaal, S., Ijspeert, A., & Billard, A. (2003). Computational approaches to motor learning
by imitation. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological sciences, 358, 537–547.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2002.1258
PMID: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12689379
Schaal, S., Kotosaka, S., & Sternad, D. (2000). Nonlinear dynamical systems as
movement primitives. In Proceeding of the IEEE-RAS International Conference on
Humanoid Robots. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press.
Schaal, S., Sternad, D., Osu, R., & Kawato, M. (2004). Rhythmic arm movement is not
discrete. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 1136–1143.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn1322
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15452580
Schaal, S., Mohajerian, P., & Ijspeert, A. (2007). Dynamics systems vs. optimal control--a
unifying view. Progress in Brain Research, 165, 425–445.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(06)65027-9
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17925262
71
Schmidt, R. A., Zelaznik, H. N., Hawkins, B., Franck, J. S., & Quinn, J. T. (1979). Motor-
output variability: A theory for the accuracy of rapid motor acts. Psychological Review,
86, 415–451.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.86.5.415
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/504536
Scholz, J. P., Kelso, J. A. S., & Schöner, G. (1987). Nonequilibrium phase transitions in
coordinated biological motion: Critical slowing down and switching time. Physics
Letters A, 123, 390–394.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0375-9601(87)90038-7
Scholz, J. P., & Schöner, G. (1999). The uncontrolled manifold concept: Identifying
control variables for a functional task. Experimental Brain Research, 126, 289–306.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002210050738
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10382616
Schöner, G. (1990). A dynamic theory of coordination of discrete movement. Biological
Cybernetics, 63, 257–270.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00203449
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2207200
Schöner, G. (1994). From interlimb coordination to trajectory formation: Common
dynamical principles. In S. P. Swinnen, H. Heuer, J. Massion, & P. Casaer (Eds.),
Interlimb coordination: Neural, dynamical and cognitive constraints (pp. 339–368).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-679270-6.50022-X
Scott, S. H. (2004). Optimal feedback control and the neural basis of volitional motor
control. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 532–546.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn1427
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15208695
Selen, L. P., Beek, P. J., & van Dieën J. H. (2006). Impedance is modulated to meet
accuracy demands during goal-directed arm movements. Experimental Brain Research,
172, 129–138.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-005-0320-7
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16372169
Shadmehr, R., & Mussa-Ivaldi, F. A. (1994). Adaptive representation of dynamics during
learning a motor task. Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 3208–3224.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.14-05-03208.1994
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8182467
Shadmehr, R., Orban de Xivry, J. J., Xu-Wilson, M., & Shih, T. Y. (2010). Temporal
discounting of reward and the cost of time in motor control. Journal of Neuroscience,
30, 10507–10516.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1343-10.2010
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20685993
72
Shmuelof, L., Krakauer, J. W., & Mazzoni, P. (2012). How is a motor skill learned?
Change and invariance at the levels of task success and trajectory control. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 108, 578–594.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00856.2011
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22514286
Singer, Y., & Tishby, N. (1994). Dynamical encoding of cursive handwriting. Biological
Cybernetics, 71, 227–238.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s004220050085
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7918801
Sleimen-Malkoun, R., Temprado, J.-J., & Berton, E. (2013). Age-related changes of
movement patterns in discrete Fitts’ task. BMC Neuroscience, 14, 145.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2202-14-145
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24228864
Slifkin, A. B., & Eder, J. R. (2012). Amplitude requirements, visual information, and the
spatial structure of movement. Experimental Brain Research, 220, 297–310.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3138-0
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22718148
Smith, A., Goffman, L., Zelaznik, H. N., Ying, G. S., & McGillem, C. (1995).
Spatiotemporal stability and patterning of speech movement sequences. Experimental
Brain Research, 104, 493–501.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00231983
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7589300
Stengel, R. F. (1994). Optimal control and estimation. New York, NY, USA: Dover.
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780486682006
Sternad, D. (1998). Hot topics in motor control and learning. A dynamic systems
perspective to perception and action. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,
319–325.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02701367.1998.10607705
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9864749
Sternad, D. (2000). Debates in dynamics: A dynamical systems perspective on action and
perception. Human Movement Science, 19, 407–423.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9457(00)00024-5
Sternad, D., Marino, H., Charles, S.K., Duarte, M., Dipietro, L., & Hogan, N. (2013).
Transitions between discrete and rhythmic primitives in a unimanual task. Frontiers in
Computational Neuroscience, 7, 90.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2013.00090
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23888139
Strogatz, S. H. (1994). Nonlinear dynamics and chaos. With applications to physics,
biology, chemistry, and engineering. Cambridge, MA, USA: Perseus.
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780738204536
73
Tanaka, H., Krakauer, J. W., & Qian, N. (2006). An optimization principle for
determining movement duration. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95, 3875–3886.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00751.2005
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16571740
Temprado, J.-J., Sleimen-Malkoun, R., Lemaire, P., Rey-Robert, B., Retornaz, F., &
Berton, E. (2013). Aging of sensorimotor processes: A systematic study in Fitts’ task.
Experimental Brain Research, 228, 105–116.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-013-3542-0
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23649969
Teulings, H.-L., & Stelmach, G. E. (1991). Control of stroke size, peak acceleration, and
stroke duration in parkinsonian handwriting. Human Movement Science, 10, 315–334.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0167-9457(91)90010-U
Todorov, E., & Jordan, M. I. (2002). Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor
coordination. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 1226–1235.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn963
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12404008
Todorov, E. (2002). Cosine tuning minimizes motor errors. Neural Computation, 14,
1233–1260.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1162/089976602753712918
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12020444
Todorov, E. (2004). Optimality principles in sensorimotor control. Nature Neuroscience,
7, 907–915.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn1309
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15332089
Todorov, E. (2005). Stochastic optimal control and estimation methods adapted to the
noise characteristics of the sensorimotor system. Neural Computation, 17, 1084–1108.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1162/0899766053491887
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15829101
Torres, E. B., & Andersen, R. (2006). Space-time separation during obstacle-avoidance
learning in monkeys. Journal of Neurophysiology, 96, 2613–2632.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00188.2006
doi: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16855113
Turvey, M. T. (1977). Preliminaries to a theory of action with reference to vision. In R.
Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting and knowing: Toward an ecological
psychology (pp. 211–265). Hillsdale, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Uno, Y., Kawato, M., & Suzuki, R. (1989). Formation and control of optimal trajectory in
human multijoint arm movement - minimum torque change model. Biological
Cybernetics, 61, 89–101.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00204593
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2742921
74
Valdez, A. B., & Amazeen E. L. (2008). Using 1/f noise to examine planning and control
in a discrete aiming task. Experimental Brain Research, 187, 303–319.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-008-1305-0
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18283444
Vallbo, A. B., & Wessberg, J. (1993). Organization of motor output in slow finger
movements. Journal of Physiology (London), 469, 673–691.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1993.sp019837
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8271223
van Beers, R. J. (2008). Saccadic eye movements minimize the consequences of motor
noise. PLoS One, 3, e2070.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0002070
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18446209
van Beers, R. J., Haggard, P., & Wolpert, D. M. (2004). The role of execution noise in
movement variability. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91, 1050–1063.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00652.2003
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14561687
van Beers, R. J., Brenner, E., & Smeets, J. B. J. (2013). Random walk of motor planning
in task-irrelevant dimensions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 109, 969–977.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00706.2012
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23175799
van der Helm, F. C. T., & Rozendaal, L. A. (2000). Musculoskeletal systems with intrinsic
and proprioceptive feedback. In J. M. Winters & P. E. Crago (Eds), Biomechanics and
neural control of posture and movement (pp. 164–174). New York, NY, USA:
Springer.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-2104-3_11
van Mourik, A. M., & Beek, P. J. (2004). Discrete and cyclical movements: Unified
dynamics or separate control? Acta Psychologica (Amsterdam), 117, 121–138.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2004.06.001
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15464010
Viviani, P., & Cenzato, M. (1985). Segmentation and coupling in complex movements.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 11, 828–845.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.11.6.828
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2934511
Viviani, P., & McCollum, G. (1983). The relation between linear extent and velocity in
drawing movements. Neuroscience, 10, 211–218.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0306-4522(83)90094-5
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6646421
Viviani, P., & Schneider, R. (1991). A developmental study of the relationship between
geometry and kinematics of drawing movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 17, 198–218.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.17.1.198
75
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1826312
Viviani, P., & Terzuolo, C. (1982). Trajectory determines movement dynamics.
Neuroscience, 7, 431–437.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0306-4522(82)90277-9
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7078732
von Holst, E., & Mittelstaedt, H. (1973). The reafference principle. In R. D. Martin (Ed. &
Trans.), The behavioral physiology of animals and man: Selected papers of E. von
Holst (Vol. 1). Coral Gables, FL, USA: University of Miami Press. (Original work
published 1950).
ISBN: http://www.isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780870242618
Wada, Y., & Kawato, M. (1995). A theory for cursive handwriting based on the
minimization principle. Biological Cybernetics, 73, 3–13.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s004220050158
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7654848
Walter, A. M., & Rieger, M. (2012). Target- and effect-directed actions towards temporal
goals: Similar mechanisms? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
& Performance, 38, 958–974.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0026792
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22686693
Walsh, B., & Smith, A. (2012). Basic parameters of articulatory movements and acoustics
in individuals with Parkinson’s disease. Movement Disorders, 27, 843–850.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mds.24888
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22729986
Warren, W. H. (2006). The dynamics of perception and action. Psychological Review,
113, 358–389.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.113.2.358
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16637765
Wolpert, D. W., & Ghahramani, Z. (2000). Computational principles of movement
neuroscience. Nature Neuroscience, 3(Suppl), 1212–1217.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/81497
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11127840
Wolpert, D. M., Ghahramani, Z., & Jordan, M. I. (1995). An internal model for
sensorimotor integration. Science, 269, 1880–1882.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.7569931
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7569931
Worringham, C. J. (1991). Variability effects on the internal structure of rapid aiming
movement. Journal of Motor Behavior, 23, 75–85.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00222895.1991.9941595
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14766533
76
Wright, C. E, & Meyer, D. E. (1983). Conditions for a linear speed-accuracy trade-off in
aimed movements. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A, 35, 279–296.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14640748308402134
PMID: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6571311
Zago, M., Matic, A., Flash, T., Gomez-Marin, A., & Lacquaniti, F. (2018). The speed-
curvature power law of movements: A reappraisal. Experimental Brain Research, 236,
69–82.
doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-017-5108-z
PMI
77
A
xG(t) universal u(t) controlled x(t)
controller object
x(t) observation
y(t)
optimal
estimator
B C
xG(t)
T
step
1
a b 0 0.5 1 1.5
Time Time (s)
Figure 1
A B
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 0.2 0.4
Time (s)
Figure 2
)m(
noitisoP
2
1
0
0 0.2 0.4
Time (s)
)s/m(
yticoleV
A B
0.1
0.05
0
0 0.5 1
Time (s)
Figure 3
)m(
noitisoP
0.1
0.05
0
0 0.5 1
Time (s)
)s/m(
yticoleV
A
B
0.2
0.1
0
0 0.4 0.8
Time (s)
C
Figure 4
)m(
noitisoP
1
0.5
0
0 0.4 0.8
Time (s)
)s/m(
yticoleV
D
E
F
1
0.5
0
0 0.4 0.8
Time (s)
)s/m(
yticoleV
0.2
0.1
0
0 0.4 0.8
Time (s)
)m(
noitisoP
A C
E
100
10
1
0.1 1 10
Curvature (1/cm)
Figure 5
)s/mc(
yticoleV
2
1
0
)s(
noitaruD
x
B D
0 0.5 1 1.5 0 0.5 1 1.5
Time (s) Time (s)
1
0.5
0
3 4 8
Curvature (1/cm)
y
x
y
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2/33 2/5 3/5 4/5 3/2 2 5/2 3 4 6
Frequency ( )
Figure 6
tnenopxE
A B
10
1
0.1
1 10 100
C Curvature (1/m)
)s/m(
yticolev
laitnegnaT
A
B
0
0 1 2 3
Time (s)
Figure 7
yticoleV
C
A
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
Figure 8
)s( noitarud
tnemevoM
T
0.4im P e
0.3
e
to
p
2 a k
a c
c
e e
0
0
.
.
1
2
a
k v e
lo
1
le
r a tio
n
c
ity ( m
0 ( 0 /s
s ) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 ) 2
Amplitude (m)
)s/m(
yticolev
kaeP
30
20
10
0
B
f
0.50
0.56
0.4 0.61
0.67
0.72
0.78
0.2 0.83
0.89
0.94
1.00
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
C
)s(
noitarud
tnemevoM
2
0.4
1
0.2
0 0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
)s/m(
yticolev
kaeP
60
40
20
0
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
)s(
noitarud
tnemevoM
0.6
2
0.4
1
0.2
0 0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
)s/m(
yticolev
kaeP
60
40
20
0
B
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
C
Figure 9
)s(
noitarud
tnemevoM
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.2 0.2
0 0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
)s/m(
yticolev
kaeP
20
10
0
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
)s(
noitarud
tnemevoM
0.6
1
0.4
0.5
0.2
0 0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
)s/m(
yticolev
kaeP
T P
im e a
e k
0.4 to a c
p c e e a le
0.2
k
v
e
r a
tio
lo n
c (
0
ity
( s
m
/s
2
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 ) )
Amplitude (m)
40
20
0
)s(
noitarud
tnemevoM
1.5
0.4
1
0.2
0.5
0 0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Amplitude (m)
)s/m(
yticolev
kaeP
A
40
20
0
B
0.1
0
-0.1
4 5 6
Time (s)
Figure 10
)m(
noitisoP
A
5
A
c
c
e
l
e
r
a
t i 0 o
n
(
m
/
s
2 )
-5
0.4
0
-0.4
4 5 6
Time (s)
)s/m(
yticoleV
0.04
0
-0.04
4 5 6
Time (s)
C D
)m(
noitisoP
5
0
-5
0.4
0
-0.4
4 5 6
Time (s)
)s/m(
yticoleV
0.4
0.2
0
0 1 2
Frequency (Hz)
)s(
emit
llewD
1
0.5
0
0 1 2
Frequency (Hz)
yticinomraH
0.2
0.1
0
0 1 2
)m(
edutilpmA
A
1.5
1
0.5
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
C
T
i
m
e
a
f
t
e
r
p
e
a
k
v
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
(
s
)
Figure 11
)s(
noitaruD
0.4
0.2
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
)s(
yticolev
kaep
ot
emiT
B
1
0.5
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
D
0.4
0.2
0
)s(
noitaruD
0.4
0.2
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
)s(
yticolev
kaep
ot
emiT
2
1
0
0 4 8
T
i
m
e
a
0.4f
t
e
r
p
e
a
k
0.2
v
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
0 (
s
)
A
0.4
0.2
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
Figure 12
)s(
noitaruD
0.4
0.2
0
1
0.5
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
yticinomraH
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
)s(
emit
llewD
T
i
m
e
t
o
p
e
a
k
v e
l
o
c
i
t
y
(
s
)
B
1
0.5
0
0 1 2
Frequency (Hz)
C
A
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
B
Figure 13
)s(
noitaruD
3
2
1
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
)s/m(
yticolev
kaeP
A
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 1 2
Time (s)
B
Figure 14
)s/m(
yticoleV
1
0.5
0
0 0.5 1 1.5
Duration (s)
)s(
yticolev
kaep
ot
emiT
100 T
i
m
e
t
o
p
e
a
50 k
v
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
(
%
0
)
)s(
TM
dS
0.1
0.05
0
0 0.5 1 1.5
A
1.5
1
0.5
0
0 2 4 6 8
ID
B
C
Figure 15
)s(
noitaruD
0.01
0.005
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6
A/MT (m/s)
)m(
eW
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
0 0.5 1 1.5
Duration (s)
)s(
TM
ds
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
5 6 7 8 9 10
ID
Figure 16
)s(
noitaruD
1
0.5
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Time (s)
Figure 17
)s/m(
yticoleV
A
B
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Peak velocity (m/s)
C
)s(
noitaruD
1
0.5
0
0 0.5 1
q
2
R
1
0.5
0
pos PA pos PV pos PD
Figure 18
2
R
1
0.5
0
0 25 50 75 100
MT (%)
2
R
1
0.5
0
PA/PV PV/A PA/A
2
R
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0 25 50 75 100
MT (%)
)m(
noitisop
ds
10
5
0
PA PV PD End
)edutilpma
%(
noitisop
ds
10
5
0
PA PV PD End
)TM
%(
emit
ds
A B
C D
E F
A
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2/33 2/5 3/5 4/5 3/2 2 5/2 3 4 6
Frequency ( )
B
Figure A1
tnenopxE
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2/33 2/5 3/5 4/5 3/2 2 5/2 3 4 6
Frequency ( )
tnenopxE
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2/33 2/5 3/5 4/5 3/2 2 5/2 3 4 6
Frequency ( )
tnenopxE
C
A B
Figure B1
A
8 points
0.95 Hz
B
6 points
1.27 Hz
C
6 points
1.28 Hz
D
5 points
1.52 Hz
E
4 points
1.89 Hz
F
4 points
1.89 Hz
Figure C1