Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-025-41155-0
REVIEW ARTICLE
Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy
Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey
Yan Jia1, Yuxin Song1, Zihou Liu2, Qingyin Tan1, Yang Song3, Yu Zhang(B)1, Zheli Liu1
1 Key Laboratory of Data and Intelligent System Security, Ministry of Education, China (DISSec), Tianjin Key Laboratory
of Network and Data Security Technology (NDST), College of Cryptology and Cyber Science, Nankai University, Tianjin
300350, China.
2 DISSec, NDST, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China.
3 School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, HangZhou 310018, China.
© Higher Education Press 2025
Abstract The Consumer Internet of Things (CIoT), a no-
table segment within the IoT domain, involves the integration
of IoT technology into consumer electronics and devices,
such as smart homes and smart wearables. Compared to
traditional IoT fields, CIoT di ffers notably in target users,
product types, and design approaches. While o ffering
convenience to users, it also raises new security and privacy
concerns. Network tra ffic analysis, a widely used technique
in the security community, has been extensively applied
to investigate these concerns about CIoT. Compared to
traditional network traffic analysis in fields like mobile apps
and websites, CIoT introduces unique characteristics that
pose new challenges and research opportunities. Researchers
have made significant contributions in this area. To
aid researchers in understanding the application of tra ffic
analysis tools for assessing CIoT security and privacy risks,
this survey reviews 310 publications on tra ffic analysis
within the CIoT security and privacy domain from January
2018 to June 2024, focusing on three research questions.
Our work: 1) outlines the CIoT tra ffic analysis process
and highlights its di fferences from general network tra ffic
analysis. 2) summarizes and classifies existing research
into four categories according to its application objectives:
device fingerprinting, user activity inference, malicious
traffic detection, and measurement. 3) explores emerging
challenges and potential future research directions based on
each step of the CIoT tra ffic analysis process. This will
provide new insights to the community and guide the industry
towards safer product designs.
Keywords Consumer IoT, Smart Home, Consumer IoT
Security, User Privacy, Traffic Analysis, Survey.
1 Introduction
In recent years, numerous sectors related to the Internet of
Things (IoT) have become part of everyday life, such as
smart cities, industrial automation, smart homes, and smart
healthcare [1–4]. A report by IoT Analytics 1) predicts that
the global IoT market will grow by 15% in 2025, reaching
$347 billion.
Compared with Industrial IoT (IIoT) and Medical IoT
(MIoT), CIoT exhibits distinct di fferences in target users,
device types, and product design objectives. Emerging
security and privacy concerns in CIoT are increasingly
prominent, with users expressing growing apprehension [5–
7]. Firstly, CIoT targets general consumers and frequently
collects much personal information, such as location, health
status, and daily routines, which may not be adequately
protected. Secondly, the market hosts a wide variety
of CIoT devices from numerous brands, resulting in low
standardization. Thirdly, to improve user experience, the
security measures in these devices are often simplified,
that is, the short production cycles and limited capabilities
of CIoT devices hinder e ffective defense against security
threats [8]. Researchers have explored CIoT security issues
and identified many risks [9–11].
Network traffic analysis is an essential tool for security and
privacy research. Given the aforementioned risks associated
with CIoT, new research scenarios and works have emerged
in the field of CIoT tra ffic, distinct from traditional network
Received March 14, 2025; accepted May 6, 2025
E-mail: zhangyu1981@nankai.edu.cn
1)IoT market size by IoT Analytics, visit https://iot-analytics.com/
iot-market-size/
arXiv:2403.16149v6  [cs.CR]  14 May 2025
2 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
Paper Organization
1. Introduction
2. Background
4. Literature Collection
5. Process of CIoT 
Traffic Analysis
6. The Applications in 
Security and Privacy
3. Related Surveys
8. Challenges and 
Future Research
9. Conclusion
5.1 CIoT Traffic Collection 5.2 CIoT Traffic Processing
5.3 CIoT Traffic Analysis 
Algorithm
5.4 New Characteristics in 
CIoT Traffic Analysis
RQ1: Are there any unique characteristics of CIoT traffic analysis 
different from general network traffic?
6.1 Device Fingerprinting
6.4 Measurement6.3 Malicious Traffic Analysis
6.2 User Activity Inference
RQ2: Looking at the traffic, what can we learn about CIoT 
systems from security and privacy perspectives at present?
RQ3: What new issues or challenges remain unresolved for 
security researchers in the field of CIoT traffic analysis?
8.4 New Applications8.3 Analysis Algorithm
8.1 CIoT Traffic Collection 8.2 CIoT Traffic Processing
7. Measures Against 
Traffic Analysis
5.5 Case Description
Fig. 1 The organization of survey
traffic. By conducting an in-depth analysis of network tra ffic
generated by CIoT devices, researchers can better understand
device behavior patterns and promptly detect and prevent
potential security threats. Furthermore, tra ffic analysis
assists in assessing and improving data privacy protection
within the CIoT environment. Although many researchers
have concentrated on examining CIoT tra ffic to bolster its
security and privacy, CIoT, as a relatively new application
compared to traditional ones, has special characteristics and
may present new challenges.
Emerging technologies such as machine learning (ML)
and deep learning (DL) have significantly enhanced the ef-
fectiveness of traffic analysis within the CIoT domain. These
technologies provide improved capabilities for processing
and analyzing large-scale tra ffic data. AI-based methods,
particularly in the areas of feature extraction and pattern
recognition, play a crucial role in addressing the complexities
of CIoT traffic, offering advanced solutions for security and
privacy challenges.
Considering that no other researchers in the community
have explored how tra ffic analysis can guide CIoT security
and privacy practices and that there is still an upward trend
in this area, this paper systematically reviews the literature
on CIoT tra ffic analysis over the past six years from the
perspective of security and privacy. It conducts a detailed
analysis around the following three research questions (RQs):
• RQ1: Are there any unique characteristics of CIoT
traffic analysis different from general network traffic?
• RQ2: Looking at the tra ffic, what can we learn about
CIoT systems from security and privacy perspectives
at present?
• RQ3: What new issues or challenges remain unre-
solved for security researchers in the field of CIoT
traffic analysis?
We systematically reviewed 310 papers from top-tier
conferences and journals from January 2018 to June 2024
using the literature retrieval method described in Section 4.
Based on these studies, we first summarize the process
of CIoT tra ffic analysis, which comprises three key steps:
CIoT traffic collection, CIoT traffic processing, and analysis.
We point out the di fferences between CIoT tra ffic analysis
and general network tra ffic analysis across these three steps
(RQ1). Next, We categorize and summarize existing
research according to their application goals, including
device fingerprinting, user activity inference, malicious traffic
analysis, and measurement, while also examining the latest
advancements in each area ( RQ2). Our research shows
that AI-based technologies play an important role in this
field. Finally, based on the tra ffic analysis process and its
various application scenarios, we identify key challenges and
outline future research directions and opportunities ( RQ3).
This article aims to provide researchers in the community
with a deeper understanding of how tra ffic analysis can be
leveraged to assess security and privacy practices within
the CIoT ecosystem. In addition to previous studies
that primarily emphasize machine learning technology in
traffic analysis, our work provides a more integrated and
comprehensive perspective grounded in security and privacy,
offering practical and targeted guidance for strengthening
protection in the CIoT domain.
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 3
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• This is the first survey that focuses on CIoT tra ffic
from security and privacy perspectives. We employed
a standardized literature retrieval methodology and
conducted an in-depth review and classification of
existing works, enabling researchers to e fficiently
grasp the current landscape of the field.
• We extracted the CIoT tra ffic analysis process from
the literature and conducted a detailed comparison
with general network traffic analysis, emphasizing the
unique characteristics of CIoT.
• Based on this process, we provide new insights into
the challenges associated with each step of CIoT traffic
analysis and propose promising directions for future
research.
Paper Organization. The paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 covers the basics of CIoT and tra ffic analysis.
Section 3 reviews relevant surveys. In Section 4, we
introduce the methodology for collecting the literature.
Section 5 presents the CIoT tra ffic analysis process and
its unique characteristics. Section 6 discusses current
works categorized by application goals. We summarize the
measures against traffic analysis in Section 7. The challenges
and future research directions are discussed in Section 8. We
conclude the survey in Section 9. The organization of our
survey is shown in Figure 1.
2 Background
This survey focuses on the application of tra ffic analysis to
the security and privacy of the CIoT. In this section, we
first introduce the fundamental architecture, lifecycle, and
control methods of CIoT. Next, we provide an overview of
the general tra ffic analysis process. The specific process of
CIoT traffic analysis will be detailed in Section 5, where it
will also be compared to general network traffic analysis.
2.1 Consumer Internet of Things
CIoT devices are typically monitored via mobile apps or
software API interfaces, enabling users to manage connected
devices remotely or locally. For example, users can remotely
open the lights or thermostats in a home, or use wearable
devices such as smartwatches to monitor users’ health data
and provide corresponding feedback and suggestions. Given
the highly sensitive nature of the data collected by these
devices [12], ensuring security and privacy for CIoT systems
is essential to protecting users’ personal information.
Representative CIoT scenarios are shown in Figure 2.
There are multiple control methods for the devices. Wi-Fi-
enabled devices can communicate with remote users through
cloud services. The transmitted information includes device
command, status, and heartbeat packets which maintain
the connection. It is worth noting that in addition to
the first-party cloud communicated directly by the device,
third-party clouds, such as advertisers, may also obtain
device information [13, 14]. Devices using low-power
protocols typically connect to a smart gateway, which acts
as an intermediary to the Internet. Furthermore, third-party
platforms can be authorized to use device control APIs. As
shown in the figure, we summarize the following five control
methods:
• Physical Control. Users can physically interact with
devices.
• Multimodal Interaction. CIoT devices, equipped
with various sensors, support multimodal interactions.
For example, motion sensors detect activity to control
smart lights, and smart speakers like Amazon Alexa
and Xiaomi XiaoAi support voice commands.
• Local Area Network (LAN) Control. When the
device and smartphone are on the same network,
they communicate via Bluetooth or Wi-Fi for basic
functions, firmware updates, and settings.
• Wide Area Network (WAN) Control. When the
smartphone and device are not on the same LAN,
commands and status updates are relayed through the
cloud.
• Cloud API Control. Besides companion apps, some
platforms o ffer cloud APIs for third-party access via
authorization, enabling automation control like IFTTT
2).
Besides multiple control methods, the workflow of CIoT
devices typically follows four lifecycle phases : setup,
interaction, idle, and deletion [12]. Initially, the user setups
the device, including configuring the network and account
binding before using it. After setup, the user interacts with
the device during the interaction phase. When there is no
interaction, the device enters an idle state. Finally, a user
can remove the device from the account, marking the deletion
phase.
Smart Hub
Wi-Fi Devices
Low-Power Devices
Physical Control
Multimodal 
Interaction
LAN Control
WAN Control
Cloud API 
Control
Router
Cloud
Third-Party Cloud
Fig. 2 The architecture of CIoT
In summary, the CIoT ecosystem supports diverse control
methods and features a lifecycle distinct from PC and mobile
apps. These characteristics potentially a ffect the analysis of
2)If This Then That, a service that lets users create simple conditional
statements, called “applets”, to automate tasks across di fferent web
services and devices.
4 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
Table 1 Related surveys
Literature
Application Technologies
Amount Years covered1
Device
Fingerprinting
User Activity
Inference
Malicious Traffic
Analysis Measurement non-ML ML
Seliem et al. [16] × √ × × √ √ 105 -2018
Gupta et al. [17] × √ × × √ √ 153 2010-2021
Zavalyshyn et al. [18] × √ × × √ √ 137 2010-2021
Alrawi et al. [19] × × × × √ √ 108 -2018
Abosata et al. [20] × × √ √ √ × 114 -2021
Wang et al. [21] × × √ × √ √ 222 -2022
Papadogiannaki et al. [22] × × √ × √ √ 176 -2021
Shen et al. [23] √ × √ × × √ 108 2007-2021
Shahraki et al. [24] × × √ × × √ 118 -2022
Mathews et al. [25] √ × × × × √ 10 -2021
Bhatiaa et al. [26] × × √ × × √ 97 -2022
Sanchez et al. [27] √ × × × √ √ 212 -2021
Jmila et al. [28] √ × × × × √ 58 2018-2022
Tahaei et al. [29] √ × × × × √ 159 -2020
Ours √ √ √ √ √ √ 303 2018-2024
1 Some surveys do not specify the quantity or time of the literature they encompass, so we summarize this information according to references.
CIoT traffic.
2.2 Tra ffic Analysis
Traffic analysis is an important tool for network security
and privacy, which extracts valuable insights from network
data [15]. Its process includes four steps: tra ffic collection,
traffic representation, analysis, and evaluation.
The purpose of tra ffic collection is to capture tra ffic data
packets at key network nodes, such as the output of the
intranet or the public network server. Common tools include
wireshark or tcpdump.
Secondly, features are extracted from the analysis unit and
represented in a format suitable for the subsequent analysis.
For non-encrypted traffic, Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) can
be used to analyze the payloads of packets. However,
with the rise in packet encryption in data transmission,
encrypted tra ffic analysis has become mainstream, which
requires researchers to extract tra ffic features independent
of payload. In the beginning, the focus was primarily on
packet-level features. By examining the values in packet
headers, researchers could gather extensive information like
packet length or number of bytes grouped. However, the
rapid increase in traffic volume necessitates the development
of flow-level features. A flow is a collection of packets
with the same five-tuple (source IP, destination IP, source
port, destination port, and protocol). Flow analysis redirects
attention from individual packets to the interactions between
the source and destination. NetFlow and sFlow are popular
tools for flow-level analysis. Statistical analysis methods
were integrated into traffic analysis to combine features from
multiple flows [30]. The mean and median are combined with
packet or flow-level features to generate statistical features.
Advancements in deep learning have made it possible to
convert raw packets into images or sequences that can then
be processed by deep learning models, eliminating manual
feature extraction.
Next, we explore the diverse algorithms used in tra ffic
analysis, categorized into machine learning (ML) and non-
machine learning (non-ML) approaches. Corresponding to
the extracted features, these methods are mainly applied
to encrypted tra ffic analysis. ML algorithms are further
divided into traditional machine learning (TML) , deep
learning (DL) , and reinforcement learning (RL) . TML
includes algorithms that learn patterns and make predictions
or decisions based on data [31, 32]. Feature selection in
TML algorithms is crucial yet challenging. In contrast, DL
models excel at automatically learning hierarchical features
from data through various abstraction layers [33]. RL is
a unique subset of ML that equips agents to observe the
environment, select actions, and adjust behavior based on
rewards or punishments [34], leading to optimal decision-
making strategies. Despite their advantages, AI algorithms
sometimes cannot explain false positives or negatives and
are limited by data size [35]. To address these challenges,
researchers have explored non-ML algorithms as alternatives,
including model-based methods [35, 36], locality-sensitive
hashing (LSH) [37, 38], and other techniques.
Finally, studies evaluate the performance of algorithms
using various metrics. In Section 5, we will summarize the
CIoT traffic analysis process and explain the framework in
detail, considering the unique characteristics of CIoT devices.
3 Related Surveys
Earlier surveys have investigated IoT security and privacy,
general network tra ffic analysis, and IoT device fingerprint-
ing, which overlaps with Section 6.1. In contrast, our paper
offers the first exhaustive review of tra ffic analysis focusing
on CIoT security and privacy aspects, seeking to identify
the information contained in CIoT tra ffic and the challenges
encountered in its analysis. Table 1 highlights the distinctions
between our work and the existing surveys.
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 5
3.1 IoT Privacy and Security
As IoT devices become increasingly prevalent, safeguarding
user privacy has emerged as a key issue. Several researchers
have explored various aspects of IoT privacy protection.
Seliem et al. [16] reviewed existing research and solutions
to privacy issues. Gupta and Ghanavati [17] conducted a
systematic literature review on IoT privacy practices and
technologies, providing a comprehensive summary of several
issues related to privacy protection; Zavalyshyn et al. [18]
focused on privacy-enhancing technologies of the smart
gateway. Several surveys focus on IoT security. Alrawi
et al. [19] summarized the literature on IoT device security
and organized a systematic evaluation method for assessing
device security attributes; Abosata et al. [20] discusses the
security risks caused by the implementation of industrial
IoT in smart cities and intelligent manufacturing and then
categorizes attacks and potential security solutions; Due to
Home Automation (HA) systems being vulnerable, Wang et
al. [21] studied the security of HA from the perspectives of
attacks and defense and summarized relevant literature. By
contrast, our research investigates user privacy and security
through the perspective of network tra ffic, highlighting
differences in applying traffic analysis in the field of CIoT.
3.2 Tra ffic Analysis
Some researchers review the advancements in traffic analysis
research, with a particular emphasis on encrypted network
traffic and the use of machine learning. Papadogiannaki
and Ioannidis [22] investigated the techniques, applications,
and countermeasures related to encrypted network tra ffic
analysis. They summarized relevant literature from four
aspects: network analysis, network security, user privacy,
and middleware network functionality. Shen et al. [23]
focused on the application of ML techniques in encrypted
traffic analysis. This work organizes the existing literature
in four directions: network asset identification, network
characterization, privacy leak detection, and attack detection.
Bhatiaa et al. [26] specifically discussed the encrypted traffic
of smartphones. Furthermore, Shahraki et al. [24] highlighted
the benefits of employing online machine learning for
traffic analysis. Mathews et al. [25] examined methods to
defend against website fingerprinting. Overall, these studies
focus on analyzing network tra ffic from personal computers
and smartphones, rather than concentrating on the tra ffic
generated by CIoT devices. Our work specifically focuses
on the tra ffic generated by CIoT devices, including both
encrypted and unencrypted traffic.
3.3 IoT Fingerprinting
Some surveys focus on tra ffic analysis on CIoT devices, but
only cover device fingerprinting. Sanchez et al. [27] reviewed
device behavior fingerprints, covering not only smart home
devices but also non-IoT devices such as PCs and personal
smartphones. Jmila et al. [28] summarized the application
of ML in the field of device classification and highlighted
key issues to consider in device classification, such as feature
costs and learning quality. Tahaei et al. [29] investigated
the application of network tra ffic classification in di fferent
fields of IoT, including common IoT devices, smart cities,
and healthcare systems. Di fferent from other surveys, this
survey starts from the perspective of security and privacy,
covers more application targets, and discusses future research
directions based on the uniqueness of CIoT.
4 Literature Collection
Manually 
reviewing
A-class
Initial 
Keywords
Update
76 papers
First Round 
Keywords
Update
B-class and high 
cited papers
234 papers
Second Round 
Keywords 310 papers
Manually 
reviewing
Paper Retrieval
Fig. 3 The process of paper retrieval
To improve the quality of literature retrieval, we refer to
well-known public lists of academic conferences and journals
about network security, including the recommendations of
Professor Guofei Gu from Texas A&M University, Professor
Jianying Zhou from Singapore University of Technology
and Design, and Tsinghua University’s Computer Science
Discipline Group (TH-CPL) and the China Computer
Federation (CCF). We particularly emphasize conferences
and journals in the A and B categories related to network and
information security, computer networks, high-performance
computing, and systems software and software engineering.
Based on these sources, we categorize the journals and
conferences into classes A and B by comprehensively
evaluating their rankings across the above lists.
The process of paper retrieval is shown in Figure 3. We
adopted the snowball generations approach to expand the
search keywords dynamically, ensuring both accuracy and
breadth in our literature search. We first identified the initial
keywords that are closely related to our topic, as shown in
Table 2 under “Initial”. “IoT Tra ffic” is a core keyword that
must appear in the retrieved articles. “security” and “privacy”
are auxiliary keywords, meaning at least one or more of them
6 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
Table 2 The keywords used in literature search.
Rounds Keywords
Initial IoT traffic, security, privacy
First
Round
IoT traffic, security, privacy, detection, fingerprint, vulnerable, attack,
malicious, botnet, measurement
Second
Round
IoT traffic, security, privacy, detection, fingerprint, identification,
classification, vulnerable, attack, hack, malicious, anomalous, botnet,
DDoS, measurement, smart home, smart wearable, intrusion
are included in the search results. We conducted searches
using these keywords in all 17 A-class conferences and
journals (such as USENIX, S&P, NDSS, and CCS), resulting
in 2,966 papers over the past years (2018-2024).
By manually reviewing each paper, we carefully selected a
subset of 76 closely relevant papers about CIoT from A-class
conferences and journals as the core literature for our survey.
We dynamically expand initial keywords while reviewing.
Based on the keywords and abstracts of these core papers, we
gained the auxiliary keywords (referred to as “First Round”
in Table 2). Subsequently, we searched B-class literature
and extra papers that are highly cited but not within the
scope using the first-round keywords. In this process, we
used the same method to dynamically expand the keywords.
Finally, the second round of keywords (referred to as “Second
Round” in Table 2) and 234 related articles were obtained.
In total, we identified 310 relevant papers. The change
in the number of papers over time is shown in Figure 4.
Considering the length limitation, we have selected 156 of
the most classic and core articles for a detailed introduction.
The complete list of journals and papers is available online.
3)
24
55
59
51
63
44
14
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Number of papers
Fig. 4 The number of papers published from 2018 to 2024
5 Process of CIoT Traffic Analysis
In Section 2.2, we’ve briefly covered the basic process of
traffic analysis. In this section, we summarized the process
of CIoT tra ffic analysis and its unique characteristics to
answer RQ1. By reviewing the existing literature, we outline
the basic process of CIoT tra ffic analysis in 5.1, 5.2, and
3)Complete list of journals and papers, visit
https://github.com/NKUHack4FGroup/CIoT-traffic-survey
5.3, which includes CIoT tra ffic collection , CIoT tra ffic
processing, analysis, which is depicted in Figure 5. The
application will be discussed in detail in Section 6. Based
on this process, we summarize the unique characteristics of
CIoT compared to the general network traffic analysis in 5.4.
5.1 CIoT Tra ffic Collection
5.1.1 Collection Process
The traffic collection process is the first step in CIoT tra ffic
analysis and differs significantly from general network traffic
analysis. Firstly, CIoT devices exhibit a wider variety,
with tra ffic patterns varying substantially among di fferent
types of devices. Secondly, CIoT devices demonstrate
diverse interaction patterns, necessitating tailored tra ffic
collection setups for various interaction scenarios. Thirdly,
different communication techniques devices use, such as Wi-
Fi and Bluetooth, require different traffic collection methods,
posing challenges in constructing comprehensive CIoT traffic
datasets.
Figure 6 illustrates five methods for acquiring traffic:
• Collection from the Router (Methods 1 (M1) and 2
(M2)): Traffic can be collected at the inside or outside
interface of the Network Address Translation (NAT)
router. The inside interface of the NAT router connects
to the private network, allowing local IP addresses
to distinguish the tra ffic of each device. Conversely,
capturing traffic at the interface after NAT mixes the
traffic of all devices within the LAN, which is also the
traffic aggregation point for regular ISPs.
• Collection through Receivers (M3): CIoT devices use
diverse communication protocols such as Zigbee and
Bluetooth, in addition to Wi-Fi. Specialized receivers
can capture the link-layer packets of these protocols.
• Generation through Simulators (M4): Due to the
challenges of collecting malicious CIoT tra ffic in the
wild, researchers sometimes use simulators to generate
special tra ffic patterns. For instance, Koroniotis et
al. [39] utilized a tool called Node-RED to simulate
devices in a virtual network.
• Crowdsourced Collection (M5): “Crowdsourcing”
refers to the practice of gathering information or
data about network tra ffic through a large number
of individuals, typically users or volunteers. Since
acquiring devices from various brands and categories
can be costly, and simulating realistic user interaction
traffic is challenging, some researchers leverage
crowdsourcing to gather data [40, 41].
5.1.2 Available Datasets
Considering that De Keersmaeker et al. [42] have conducted
a comprehensive review of public datasets in the IoT field, we
only summarize the most classic and frequently cited datasets
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 7
CIoT Traffic Collection CIoT Traffic Processing
Vector
Picture/Sequence
State Machine / Hash Value
Raw Traffic
Feature 
Engineering
Measurement
TML/RL
DL
Non-ML
ROC / AOC / 
Accuracy / 
Recall / 
Precision / 
F1 Score
Algorithm and EvaluationRepresentation
Applications
Information 
Extraction
Device 
Fingerprinting
Malicious 
Traffic Analysis
…
Packets
Analysis
App Devices
User Activity 
Inference
The Basic Process of CIoT Traffic Analysis
Fig. 5 The basic process of CIoT traffic analysis
LAN
 WAN
Receiver
Wi-Fi Bluetooth ZigBee
Local Control
Remote Control
③
CrowdsourcingSimulating
④ ⑤
Collection
NAT Router① ②
Fig. 6 Traffic collection setups
applicable to the CIoT field in Table 3. Among all self-
collected CIoT datasets (data collected by researchers in their
lab), the Mon(IoT)r dataset is the most frequently cited and
contains the highest number of devices, followed by UNSW,
YT, Ours, and PingPong.
By analyzing the related dataset papers and Table 3, we
identify several shortcomings in the current CIoT datasets.
According to the survey by De Keersmaeker et al. [42],
researchers have created nearly 70 datasets. However, we
observe that the number and types of CIoT devices included
in these datasets are very limited, and most of the data
collection occurred before 2021, failing to reflect the current
trends in CIoT devices. Furthermore, echoing the insights
from De Keersmaeker et al. [42], future datasets should
encompass a broader range of protocols (such as LoRa,
Sigfox, etc.) and place greater emphasis on link-layer tra ffic
analysis.
Although De Keersmaeker et al. have comprehensively
classified datasets, the article lacks insights into the
geographical location of tra ffic collection. Devices in
different regions adhere to distinct laws and regulations,
leading to variations in transmitted data content. we observed
that most datasets appear to be self-collected in laboratory
settings, likely due to the convenience of tra ffic labeling.
Additionally, the majority of devices in these datasets are
from America and Europe, with a notable absence of CIoT
traffic data from Asia. Thirdly, current datasets do not
provide fine-grained labels regarding the lifecycle of devices.
In conclusion, there is a need for a more state-of-the-
art and comprehensive dataset that considers the unique
characteristics and rapid development of CIoT.
5.2 CIoT Tra ffic Processing
Following the general tra ffic analysis methodology, the
second step involves extracting features or information and
processing the data for specific application purposes.
5.2.1 Features Extraction
In this part, we introduce common features extracted from
CIoT traffic.
• Packet-level Feature. Packet-level features primarily
involve fields from packet headers, such as IP address,
port number, TTL value, payload length, and TCP
initial window size.
• Flow-level Feature.Flow features capture the overall
characteristics of a flow, including the total input and
output bytes, transmission byte rate, and flow duration.
In 2005, Moore et al. [43] summarized 249 flow-level
features.
• Statistical Feature. Based on packet-level and flow-
level features, statistical features of the tra ffic can
be computed, including measures such as maximum,
minimum, mean, variance, and standard deviation.
• Deep Learning Feature.DL algorithms can automat-
ically encode raw packets into sequences or images for
advanced analysis.
Community members have developed several tools to
facilitate the extraction of network features from raw
pcap files, including CICFlowmeter, Zeek, and Joy.
CICFlowmeter, an open-source Java tool, can extract over
80 dimensions of features. Zeek, a network tra ffic analysis
tool, enables custom feature extraction through its own
Domain Specific Language (DSL). Joy, which focuses on
the application layer, outputs data in JSON format, thereby
8 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
Table 3 The summary of existing datasets
Name Area1 Source2 Categories3 Number Communication 4
Period Size Time Lifecycle5
IoT N-IoT Wi-Fi Low-energy SU ID IR DE
Ours [48] US SC 10 8 3 ✓ × 2020.3 11.5GB 11 days × ✓ ✓ ×
YourThings [19] US SC 15 46 0 ✓ ✓ 2018.3 233GB 13 days × × ✓ ×
IoTDNS [49] US SC 28 53 12 ✓ ✓ 2019.8 366MB 2 months × × ✓ ×
UNSW [50] AUS SC 17 28 3 ✓ ✓ 2016.10 9.72GB 6 months × ✓ ✓ ×
BoT-IoT [39] AUS SL 5 5 0 - - 2018.4 69.3GB 2 months × ✓ ✓ ×
Mon(IoT)r [12] US&UK SC 15 81 0 ✓ ✓ 2018.9 12.9GB - × ✓ ✓ ×
PingPong [51] US SC 12 19 3 ✓ ✓ 2019 40.3GB 51 days × × ✓ ×
HomeSnitch [52] US SC 13 57 0 ✓ ✓ 2021.3 595MB 8 days × × ✓ ×
IoT Sentinel [53] FI SC 6 31 0 ✓ ✓ 2016 61.4MB - ✓ × × ×
IoT23 [54] CZ SC 3 3 0 ✓ × 2018 21GB 1 year × × ✓ ×
N-BaIoT [55] IL SC 3 9 0 - - 2018.3 240GB - × × ✓ ×
IoT Inspector [56] - CR - 65000 + - - - 2019.4 - - - - - -
NSL-KDD [57] US SL - - - - - 1998.5 4.06MB 7 weeks × ✓ ✓ ×
1 “US” is the United States, “UK” is the United Kingdom, “AUS” is Australia, “FI” is Finland, “CZ” is Czech Republic, “IL” is Israel.
2 “SC” stands for self-collection, “CR” is crowdsourcing, “SL” is devices simulation.
3 These datasets consist of a total of 58 types of devices, including IoT devices (smart speakers, TVs, doorbells, various sensors, etc.) and non-IoT
devices (mobile phones, laptops, and game consoles, etc.).
4 “Wi-Fi” means the devices using WiFi protocol, “Low-energy” refers to the devices using the low-energy protocol like Bluetooth, ZigBee, and Z-
Wave.
5 “SU” is setup, “ID” means idle, “IR” means interaction, “DE” is deletion.
complementing the feature sets provided by the other tools.
It is noteworthy that some researchers [44, 45] extract real-
time features by setting time windows to evaluate the model
in real-time scenarios. That is, flow-level or packet-level
features are extracted within a fixed time window. Choosing
the suitable window length is challenging: Longer time
windows increase the delay of model classification, while
shorter ones cannot accurately reflect device characteristics.
Pinheiro et al. [46] use the number of bytes transmitted
over a one-second window to identify devices and events.
Bai et al. [47] implement continuous overlapping windows
(5 minutes) to eliminate errors, finding that larger windows
enhance classification performance. However, when the time
window is greater than 8 minutes, it will not significantly
affect the performance of the model. Due to the significant
differences in traffic volume caused by the diversity of CIoT
devices, it is necessary to set different time windows for each
device type.
5.2.2 Tra ffic Representation
For the TML algorithm, tra ffic is represented as a vector
containing various features. Different neural networks (NNs)
require distinct tra ffic representations for DL frameworks.
For example, tra ffic can be viewed as time-series data and
input into recurrent neural networks (RNNs). For graph
neural networks (GNNs), the input can be a subgraph of
network traffic, such as a communication graph. For non-
ML algorithms, the tra ffic is typically represented as hash
value [37] or a state transition graph [35].
5.3 CIoT Tra ffic Analysis Algorithm
This section summarizes the algorithms used for analyzing
CIoT traffic. We found that the algorithms employed in CIoT
traffic analysis are quite similar to those used in general traffic
analysis. We summarize them as follows.
5.3.1 Machine Learning Algorithms
ML algorithms analyze input data to identify relationships
and dependencies within datasets [58]. ML algorithms can
be classified into TML, DL, and RL (briefly introduced
in Section 2.2). Additionally, the Federated Learning
(FL) algorithm is used in scenarios involving multiple
computational nodes. FL algorithm ensures user privacy by
training models locally at each node and sharing only model
updates instead of raw data.
TML algorithms are advantageous due to their robustness
and interpretability [59], making them valuable tools. Com-
monly used TML algorithms for CIoT tra ffic classification
include decision trees (DT) [60], support vector machines
(SVM) [61], random forests (RF) [62], and k-nearest
neighbor (k-NN) [63].
DL algorithms can directly learn complex feature repre-
sentations from raw data, making them particularly e ffective
for processing large datasets and extracting valuable features
from traffic. Key DL algorithms include convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), which are crafted for the analysis of
visual data [64]; GNNs, designed to handle graph-structured
data [65]; RNNs, which model sequential data [66]; Notably,
long short-term memory (LSTM) Networks are variants of
RNNs that address the vanishing gradient problem and allow
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 9
for the modeling of long-term dependencies in sequential
data [67].
RL [34] is a type of ML that enables an agent to
learn and perform tasks by interacting with its environment,
receiving feedback through rewards or penalties based on
its actions. However, traditional RL is not widely used for
CIoT traffic analysis due to the time-consuming process of
finding optimal solutions while exploring large state-action
space and the challenges of the exploration-exploitation
tradeoff [68]. To address these issues, deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) [69] algorithms utilize advanced techniques,
such as artificial neural networks, to handle high-dimensional
and continuous state and action spaces. For example,
Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) [70] use deep neural networks as
function approximators to estimate value or policy functions.
5.3.2 Non-Machine Learning Algorithms
Although ML algorithms are inherently adaptive, they are
prone to overfitting when the training data is limited in
size. Furthermore, since model training often requires
considerable time, changes in the environment necessitate
model retraining, which may lead to delays in detection [38].
Consequently, some researchers opt for non-ML algorithms.
Initially, basic rule-based methods [71] and signature-based
methods [72] played important roles.
Subsequently, more advanced non-ML analysis methods
were developed. Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) is a
technique for quickly finding similar items in a large dataset.
It maps each item to a hash value and uses a family of
hash functions to group items with similar hash values. This
approach is particularly relevant in identifying CIoT devices,
as demonstrated by Charyyev and Gunes [37] and Charyyev
and Gunes [38]. Additionally, tra ffic can be modeled as
a state machine for analysis, which has proven e fficient in
network intrusion detection systems (NIDS). For example,
Duan et al. [35] constructed CIoT packet-level automaton to
profile traffic patterns.
Finally, the algorithm should be evaluated for its
performance and effectiveness in solving a particular problem
or task. Several commonly used metrics are employed to
measure performance, as introduced in Table 4. Some of
the most commonly used metrics are accuracy Precision
& Recall, which intuitively show the improvement of
researchers’ work.
5.4 New Characteristics in CIoT Tra ffic Analysis
The tra ffic analysis process of CIoT and other fields (e.g.,
PC website tra ffic) share moderate similarities. However,
the unique features of CIoT have led to numerous attempts
to customize and improve the analysis process at every step
to achieve specific application goals. In this subsection,
we summarize the challenges faced by CIoT tra ffic analysis
and its unique characteristics compared to network traffic, as
shown in Table 5).
Table 4 Evaluation metrics
Metrics Detail
Accuracy (Pt + Nt)/(Pt + Nt + Pf + Nf )
Precision & Recall Precision=Pt/(Pt + Pf )
Recall=Pt/(Pt + Nf )
F1 score 2∗Precision ∗Recall / (Precision + Recall)
ROC & AUC
ROC curve visually plots the true positive rate
against the false positive rate at various
classification thresholds. AUC represents the
overall performance of the model by calculating
the area under the ROC curve
Pt: True positive example; Pf : False positive example;
Nt: True negative example; Nf : False negative example.
5.4.1 Tra ffic Collection
The collection of CIoT tra ffic data is more complex
than that of PC or mobile apps, as summarized in the
following aspects. First, there are many types of CIoT
devices, each di ffering in hardware and software design,
making collecting substantial training data a significant
challenge [73]. Second, CIoT devices typically have diverse
interaction modes, complicating the automation of tra ffic
collection. Third, tra ffic analysis must consider the features
of various communication technologies (such as Wi-Fi, BLE,
Zigbee, Z-Wave, LoRa, and NB-IoT) and use the appropriate
receivers to capture the packets in di fferent layers. Finally,
different lifecycle phases of devices exhibit distinct tra ffic
patterns. For example, during the setup phase, a device
may engage in numerous TLS key negotiations and domain
name requests, whereas, in the idle state, it typically sends
only heartbeat packets to maintain connections. Each phase
requires specific user configurations that are challenging to
automate.
In summary, the complexity of collecting CIoT tra ffic
leads some researchers to prefer using public datasets rather
than creating their own.
5.4.2 Tra ffic Processing
For traffic processing, the low power requirements and the
diverse range of communication protocols, device types, and
lifecycle phases of CIoT bring new tra ffic characteristics
for feature extraction. Firstly, CIoT devices generally have
simpler hardware configurations than traditional network
computing devices, often resulting in smaller TCP bu ffer
sizes [74]. This limitation directly affects packet transmission
and network congestion control mechanisms. Additionally,
traditional metrics used in network tra ffic classification,
such as the user-agent field in HTTP, may not always
be e ffective for CIoT devices due to their limited use of
online web services. Furthermore, our survey indicates
that the set of DNS domains or remote IPs contacted by
CIoT devices is a popular feature used by researchers [49,
50, 75]. This is because CIoT devices communicate
with a limited number of endpoints. Significantly, many
CIoT device manufacturers develop proprietary application
10 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
Table 5 Comparison of CIoT traffic and general network traffic
Items CIoT Traffic Non-IoT Ta ffic
Device Type diverse simple
Protocol diverse and customized relatively diverse and standard
Interaction Mode complex easy
Communication Technology various mostly IP-based
Traffic Volume small large
Update Frequency low high
Available Datasets relatively few numerous
layer protocols and implement encryption based on these
protocols. Considering common tra ffic features that may not
behave well, it is essential to precisely capture these unique
characteristics.
Secondly, tra ffic from CIoT devices varies significantly
depending on the type and lifecycle phase. For example,
devices like plugs or lamps exchange a few packets, whereas
cameras generate large volumes of video and audio data. This
variability poses a challenge for statistical feature extraction.
In contrast, tra ffic analysis in other fields, like website
fingerprinting, generates many packets during short-term
visits. That is, the volume of CIoT tra ffic is caused by a
specific event or device type. As a result, it is necessary to
pay more attention to packet-level features rather than relying
solely on flow-level or statistical features commonly used in
general network traffic.
5.4.3 Algorithm
The deployment characteristics of CIoT bring some di ffer-
ences in general tra ffic analysis algorithms. First, network
traffic characteristics change rapidly, necessitating frequent
retraining of models to adapt to updates. However, this
dynamic is less pronounced in CIoT devices due to their
longer firmware update cycles [76]. As a result, CIoT tra ffic
classification models often retain their e ffectiveness over
extended periods. This was confirmed by a study by Ahmed
et al. [48], who used a 2020 dataset to train fingerprints and
tested them using a 2021 dataset. The experiment showed
that temporality does not significantly a ffect the accuracy
of device fingerprints. Second, the dispersed location,
large number, and limited bandwidth of compromised CIoT
devices present additional challenges. Specifically, the
low bandwidth DDoS attack from CIoT botnet may pose
additional difficulty for detection algorithms. Third, the low
power requirements of CIoT necessitate the use of distributed
algorithm. While traditional network tra ffic classification
models are typically executed on personal computers or
servers with substantial computational resources, CIoT
scenarios often require deployment on gateways or servers.
This increases the demand for distributed designs such as FL.
5.5 Case Description
Device identification is a typical application scenario in this
field. Therefore, to facilitate reader understanding, this
subsection outlines the core process of CIoT tra ffic analysis
through a hypothetical case study of device fingerprinting.
The first step in the analysis process is tra ffic collection.
We assume that we have control over the router, which
enables us to capture the tra ffic between devices and the
cloud using port mirroring tools on the internal interface of
the NAT router. It is important to note that devices generate
different tra ffic patterns at various stages of their lifecycle.
For example, during the setup phase, devices may perform a
significant number of TLS handshakes, while in the idle state,
they primarily generate periodic heartbeat packets. Firmware
updates often involve more intensive data transfers. By
collecting traffic from different stages of the device lifecycle,
we can build more accurate models of device behavior for
subsequent analysis Once tra ffic collection is complete,
the next step is tra ffic processing. We extract packet-level
features, flow-level features, and statistical features from the
traffic captured at di fferent lifecycle stages, and combine
them into feature vectors. Multiple feature vectors are then
aggregated to form a complete dataset. In the analysis
phase, we opt for a machine learning approach for device
classification, using algorithms such as Random Forest. The
dataset obtained in the previous step serves as the input
for constructing device fingerprints. We randomly split the
dataset into two groups: one containing 70% of the “training”
instances and the other containing 30% of the “testing”
instances. After training the model on the training set, we
evaluate its performance on the test set using metrics such as
accuracy, precision, and recall. Additionally, cross-validation
is performed to ensure the robustness of the model, resulting
in a classification model with optimal performance.
Through the process outlined above, it becomes evident
that the core of CIoT tra ffic analysis lies in its ability to
flexibly address the challenges posed by device diversity,
protocol heterogeneity, and the dynamic nature of application
scenarios.
Takeaways: This section outlines the process of CIoT
traffic analysis and addresses RQ1. We introduced in
detail the three basic processes: tra ffic collection, tra ffic
processing, and analysis, and discussed separately how
CIoT traffic differs from general network tra ffic analysis in
these three steps. CIoT devices have various models and
communication protocols, involve multiple interactions, and
have intricate life cycles. Therefore, di fferent CIoT devices
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 11
exhibit unique behavior patterns, necessitating targeted
traffic processing methods and algorithms for application in
real-world scenarios.
6 The Applications in Security and Privacy
Within this section, as the focus of our research work, we list
the cutting-edge and representative literature in CIoT tra ffic
security and privacy. We group the current research into
four primary categories according to application scenarios or
objectives, addressing RQ2. These four categories include
device fingerprinting, user activity inference, malicious traffic
analysis, and measurement. Figure 7 displays the publication
trends for these application purposes. At the end of
this section, we summarize our findings by presenting the
advantages, limitations, and application scenarios for each
application goal and its subcategories.
5
17 16
11
17
5
0
3 4 4
1
3 2
0
9
23
25 26
29
24
13
1
3 4 3
2
5
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Device Fingerprinting User Activity Inference
Malicious Traffic Analysis Measurement
Fig. 7 Publication trends of different application purposes
6.1 Device Fingerprinting
Different types, vendors, and behaviors of CIoT devices
generate tra ffic with unique characteristics, which can be
used to uniquely identify devices and their behaviors, just
like a fingerprint. The general process for constructing
device fingerprints is shown in Figure 8. As shown in
the figure, tra ffic from devices is processed and fed into
the model to train a fingerprint of the di fferent devices,
which can then be used to identify whether a segment of an
unknown traffic pattern belongs to a device or not. Device
fingerprinting can be further classified into three categories:
device identification, device behavior identification, and
hidden device detection.
6.1.1 Device Identification
Device identification involves using unique tra ffic patterns
to identify devices, such as their vendors and types or
Fig. 8 The basic process of device fingerprinting
categories. This information facilitates fingerprinting attacks:
attackers use the information to discover vulnerable targets.
On the other hand, it also can help regulators recognize these
vulnerable devices. Considering that there are a large number
of works in this field and the contributions of researchers are
clearly distinguished at di fferent stages in the CIoT tra ffic
analysis framework (described in Section 5), in this part we
classify the literature based on their contribution.
1OTraffic Collection. For the tra ffic collection step,
some work in the device identification field enriches the
dataset. Specifically, they consider the devices that use low-
energy protocols, certain kinds of devices (smart TVs or
smartwatches), and the number of devices in the dataset.
Certain research [77–79] endeavors to tackle these issues
and integrate devices that use low-energy protocols into
their studies. Babun et al. [77] asserted themselves as
the pioneering work that investigates the Zigbee and Z-
Wave device fingerprinting framework. They constructed
a density distribution based on inter-arrival time (IAT) by
capturing packets at the link layer, which is divided into
300 equal intervals to build the signature. They conducted
tests on 39 popular Zigbee and Z-Wave devices, resulting
in accuracy rates of 91.2% for Zigbee and 93.6% for Z-
Wave, respectively. Considering the asymmetry of learning
and testing by ISPs during device identification, Ma et al.
[78] monitored inbound and outbound packets and extracted
Spatial-Temporal features to identify these devices that share
a common IP (behind a NAT) from the ISP’s perspective. The
protocols used by the devices include Bluetooth, Zigbee, or
LoRa. Kostas et al. [79] used the entropy of the payload as
the feature, which also allows them to identify devices with
non-IP and low-power protocols.
Some researchers [80, 81] focused on edge IoT devices
such as smart wearables and smart TVs. Aksu et al.
[80] focused on fingerprints of wearable devices using the
Bluetooth protocol based on Bluetooth packet characteristics.
The algorithm utilizes the inter-arrival time of packets as a
feature and can automatically select the optimal solution from
over 20 classifiers. In light of the advertising tracking and
data leakage issues associated with smart TVs, Varmarken et
al. [81] extracted application fingerprints based on domains,
data packets, and TLS information. The process relies only
on a few packets, making their method lightweight and
12 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
applicable to encrypted traffic.
Ahmed et al. [48] unprecedentedly considered a remark-
able number of 188 devices. The experiment integrated
six public datasets along with a self-collected dataset (the
“Ours” dataset). They innovatively considered five di fferent
fingerprinting granularities: device instances; devices have
unique make and model; devices have the same manufacturer
and type; devices have the same manufacturer; devices have
the same device category. Employing RF as the classifier, its
accuracy surpasses 97% in all five cases.
Moreover, Bremler-Barr et al. [74] expanded the dataset
to non-IoT devices. They designed a multi-stage classifier
to distinguish IoT and non-IoT devices. This o ffers insights
for extracting background tra ffic (i.e., tra ffic from non-IoT
devices like smartphones and PCs) in CIoT traffic analysis.
2OTraffic Processing. Part of the works [82, 83] adopted
personalized feature processing methods. Sivanathan et
al. [82] made the first systematic study on smart device
identification. They collected three-week tra ffic from 20
CIoT devices and extracted 11 distinct features by observing
device activity patterns. They divided the values of each
feature into 5 ranges called cluster bins to distinguish
different devices. This method achieved a 95% accuracy.
However, as the number of devices increases, only 11 features
with 5 gradations become insu fficient. Marchal et al. [83]
divided network tra ffic into multiple time-series “flows”,
which are defined as a collection of packets using a given
MAC address and protocol. They then computed 33 periodic
features obtained from the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
of tra ffic and employed the k-NN algorithm for device
classification.
Some researchers [49, 84, 85] believe that the backend
infrastructure for device connections has unique information.
Guo and Heidemann [84] utilized unique communication
server domain names to label CIoT devices; it can detect
devices behind Network Address Translation (NAT) from
aggregated tra ffic. However, distinguishing devices of the
same type from the same manufacturer remains challenging.
Similarly, Saidi et al. [85] identified devices by analyzing
the domains and the backend infrastructure IPs and ports
they communicate with. Likewise, Perdisci et al. [49]
found that DNS domain names and their corresponding
frequencies show significant discrepancies across various
devices, providing a basis for using the DNS feature.
However, DNS depends on device services; for instance, a
TV of one brand equipped with voice services from another
can lead to confusion and reduce accuracy.
In addition, researchers [53, 78, 86] emphasize the
importance of considering device lifecycle, protocol, and
time information should also be considered. Miettinen et
al. [53] innovatively considered the setup tra ffic. They
selected 23 features from the first 12 packets during the
setup stage to identify the types of new devices and
further restricted their communication capabilities based on
security levels. Analysis in fewer packets makes their
method more lightweight. Yu et al. [86] employed BC /MC
(Broadcast/Multicast) packet features to identify devices.
The features primarily fall into three categories: identifiers
that uniquely identify the device model, main protocol fields
from BC /MC packets, and auxiliary features acquired by
active detection. To enhance the distinctiveness of features,
Ma et al. [78] devised an e fficient and scalable system
using spatial-temporal traffic fingerprinting. They integrated
both the temporal sequence of packets and their spatial
correlations across the network, which provides a more
comprehensive and accurate depiction of traffic.
In addition to the feature of the network layer and
above, some works [87, 88] considered link or physical layer
features. Dong et al. [87] incorporated frame length and
epoch time in the physical layer as features. Maiti et al. [88]
categorized the devices used into 10 classes, with features
including but not limited to frame type, size, arrival time, and
rate. The findings revealed instances of confusion between
cameras and non-IoT devices like PCs. This indicates that
there still are great challenges in utilizing link layer frames
as the optimal distinguishing features.
To save classification costs, some researchers have added
feature reduction technologies. We found that Genetic
Algorithms (GA) are the most common [44, 79]. In the
work by Aksoy and Gunes [44], 30 chromosomes correspond
to the number of feature subsets. Each chromosome
comprises a string of 0/1 representing feature selection. The
chromosomes are initially filled with 0 /1 and then run a
fitness function to ascertain the robustness of these features,
resulting in an optimal feature subset. Kostas et al. [79]
first employed the feature-importance-based voting method
to eliminate unnecessary features from the initial set. Then,
GA is applied to select the most suitable feature subset from
the remaining 52 features. In addition to GA, Santos et al.
[90] incorporated the CfsSubsetEval algorithm, which selects
subsets from the original feature set with a high correlation
with the target variable but a low correlation between
features to reduce computational complexity. Wanode et
al. [98] compared three distinct feature reduction techniques:
SVD, PCA, and MI. In the case of classifying 16 CIoT
devices, MI performs significantly better than SCD and PCA.
Another part of works designed their own feature reduction
algorithm [96, 97]. Chakraborty et al. [96] emphasize the
varying costs associated with di fferent features during the
extraction process. As a result, they devised a cross-
entropy-based algorithm to tackle this concern. Similarly,
Du et al. [97] built upon NSGA-III, introduced concepts
like symmetric uncertainty and correlation coe fficient. They
propose multiple objective functions that reduce feature
dimensions and filter effective features.
3OAlgorithm Analysis. Early studies tended to favor
TML algorithms. Gradually, researchers began considering
constructing more complex identification frameworks based
on basic classification models (e.g., SVM,k-NN, RF) or even
neural networks. Meanwhile, with the development of edge
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 13
Table 6 Summary of device identification literature
Literature Year
Contributions
Feature
Algorithm2 Datasets Source Communication Collection
Location4Algorithm1 Feature Dataset Type3 Name Public
Datasets
Self-
collection Wi-Fi Low-energy
[89] 2017 √ - - Flow TML GBM, RF,
XGBoost - √ √ - M1
[88] 2017 - √ - Packet TML DT, RF,
SVM - √ √ - M3
[53] 2017 - √ √ Packet TML RF - √ √ √ M1
[82] 2017 - √ - Statistics TML RF - √ √ - M1
[84] 2018 - √ - Packet NML - - √ √ √ M4
[47] 2018 √ - - DL DL LSTM Arunan et.al.’s
IoT campus dataset - √ - M1
[90] 2018 - √ - Statistics TML RF Arunan et.al.’s
IoT campus dataset - √ - M1
[73] 2018 √ - - - NML Apriori dataset from the National
Vulnerability Database
√ - - M1
[91] 2019 √ - - DL DL LSTM UNSW, a North America
private lab’s dataset - √ - M1
[92] 2019 √ - - Packet,
Statistics TML
RF,
Extra-Trees,
AdaBoost
UNSW,
Arunan et.al.’s
IoT campus dataset
- √ - M1
[46] 2019 √ - - Statistics TML
k-NN, RF,
DT, SVM,
Majority V oting
Arunan et.al.’s
IoT campus dataset
√ √ √ M1
[93] 2019 √ - -
Packet,
Flow,
Statistics
TML k-means - √ √ √ M2
[50] 2019 √ - √ Packet,
Flow TML RF,
Naive Bayes - √ √ √ M1
[44] 2019 - √ - Packet TML J48 DT,
OneR, PART M. Miettinen et.al.’s dataset - √ √ M1
[83] 2019 - √ - Flow,
Statistics TML k-NN - √ √ √ M1
[38] 2020 √ - - - NML LSH - √ √ - M1
[87] 2020 √ √ - DL DL LSTM - √ √ - M1
[77] 2020 - - √ Packet TML Bayes Net - √ - √ M3
[86] 2020 √ √ - DL DL Self-designed - √ √ √ M1M4
[74] 2020 - - √ Statistics TML DT, Logistic
Regression
Arunan et.al.’s
IoT campus dataset
√ √ √ M1
[94] 2020 - - √ Packet NML -
ZMap’s 443-https
-ssl3-fullipv4
TLS certificate dataset
√ √ √ M1M4
[95] 2020 √ - - Packet,
Flow TML RF - √ √ - M1
[85] 2020 - √ - Packet NML - - √ √ - M2M4
[49] 2020 √ √ - Packet NML TF-IDF - √ √ - M1M4
[96] 2021 - √ -
Packet,
Flow,
Statistics
TML DT - √ √ √ M2
[37] 2021 √ - - Flow NML LSH M. Miettinen et.al.’s Setup,
J. Ren et.al.’s Idle
√ √ √ M1
[80] 2021 - - √ Packet TML RF - √ - √ M1
[81] 2022 - - √ Packet ML Agglomerative
clustering - √ √ - M1
[97] 2022 - √ - Packet,
Statistics TML RF,
Extra-Trees UNSW - √ √ M1
[48] 2022 - - √ Statistics TML RF - √ √ √ M1
[78] 2022 - √ √ Packet DL CNN UNSW √ √ √ M1M4
[79] 2022 - √ √ Packet TML DT Aalto University’s dataset,
UNSW - √ √ M1
[98] 2022 - √ - Packet,
Statistics TML RF - √ √ √ M2
1 “Algorithm” denotes computational methods with provable improvements in either complexity (time /space) or task performance metrics.
2 The detail of algorithm of typical device identification paper is shown in section 6.1.1
3 “TML” means traditional machine learning, “DL” means deep learning, “NML” means traditional analysis.
4 “ M1 −M5” corresponds to the five methods to acquire traffic in section 5.1.
computing, researchers began to consider distributed models.
Apart from these approaches, a few studies employ non-ML
methods that effectively shorten the calculation time and are
very suitable for scenarios with high real-time requirements.
Early studies tended to favor TML algorithms [46, 50,
53, 82, 89, 90, 95]. In 2017, Meidan et al. [89] trained
a multi-stage meta classifier. The first stage di fferentiates
IoT from non-IoT devices, and the second stage identifies
specific device categories. However, the granularity of
this approach only reaches device types (such as TVs,
printers, motion sensors, etc.). Similarly, Pinheiro et
al. [46] demonstrated that using only packet statistics
features, the RF algorithm outperforms k-NN, DT, SVM,
and Majority V oting, achieving an accuracy of 96% in
device identification. To handle the frequent addition of new
devices, Ammar et al. [95] constructed a binary RF classifier
for each device. This approach eliminates the need to retrain
the entire model whenever new devices are added.
Gradually, some studies have considered constructing
more complex algorithms based on basic models [50,
14 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
92].Msadek et al. [92] emphasized the reduction of training
data and the elimination of manual tuning. This is achieved
by introducing a novel sliding window technique that
dynamically segments tra ffic. As the activity of relevant
traffic varies, the window automatically expands; otherwise,
it contracts to discard irrelevant packets. To achieve higher
accuracy, Sivanathan et al [50] collected tra ffic from 28
CIoT devices and constructed a multi-stage classifier. The
first stage employed a Naive Bayes Multinomial classifier,
taking the bag of remote port numbers, domain names, and
cipher suites as input. The bag comprises values and their
corresponding frequencies in a matrix format. Then, class
and confidence for the bag, flow volume, and flow rate
were used as inputs for the second stage. The third stage
further leveraged an RF classifier to determine categories and
confidence scores. This architecture achieved an impressive
device recognition accuracy of 99%.
Subsequently, there were studies using DL algorithms
[47, 86, 91]. Bai et al. [47] constructed an LSTM-
CNN cascade model to classify 4 device categories (hubs,
Electronics, Cameras, Switches & Triggers). However, while
the algorithm performed well in binary classification, its
accuracy dropped to 74.8% in the four-class problem. Ortiz
et al. [91] employed autoencoders to automatically learn
features from tra ffic and probabilistically model devices as
distributions of tra ffic classes. Yu et al. [86] innovatively
developed a novel multi-view wide and deep learning
(MvWDL) framework. The six views constructed in the
experiments are derived from the devices’ BC/MC protocols.
Meanwhile, they devised a hybrid-fusion multi-view artificial
NN to achieve view fusion.
Although the above approaches achieve high accuracy
in their designated scenarios, deploying the aforementioned
algorithms at one network node presents challenges in
scalability. Thangavelu et al. [93] developed a Distributed
Device Fingerprinting Technique (DEFT) to tackle this
challenge. By using SDN technology, the DEFT controller
maintains information while gateways perform classification.
While robust and manageable, DEFT is not lightweight,
necessitating the collaboration of multiple distinct gateways
to maximize system efficacy.
The above ML methods consume massive computing
resources in practical implementation. Therefore, a novel
approach based on LSH was proposed by Charyyev and
Gune [37, 38]. This approach eliminates the need for feature
extraction and doesn’t require frequent model updates. The
algorithm employs LSH functions to compute hash values
of tra ffic for device identification, which are stored in
a database. Perdisci et al. [49] analogized the Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) algorithm
from document retrieval to device identification. When
employing a set composed of DNS request frequencies as
recognition features, devices, and the requested domain
names are treated as documents and their entries to create
TF-IDF vectors. Finally, target device recognition relies on
cosine similarity between vectors.
In addition to passive traffic capture and analysis methods,
researchers have also adopted active probing techniques.
Feng et al. [73] have proposed an innovative method for
automatic discovery and annotation of IoT devices, known
as ARE. The ARE focuses on the response information of
the application layer and establishes a mapping between IoT
devices and their o fficial description websites by extracting
banner information (usually containing details like device
type and model). Compared to traditional network scanning
tools like Nmap, ARE has shown superior capabilities in
searching for IoT devices. Especially when new devices are
connected to the network, ARE can dynamically and quickly
learn and update the fingerprint information of new devices.
Summary: We have summarized relevant papers in Table 6.
Most researchers have focused on improving their algorithms
and feature extraction techniques, reaching a relatively high
accuracy within their datasets. However, practical application
scenarios still face a significant issue: tra ffic characteristics
may be confused between devices of the same type but
different models [48]. Meanwhile, only a small part of
the literature focuses on devices using low-energy protocols.
Identifying devices that support various protocols (including
Zigbee and Bluetooth) will be challenging. We also observed
that most studies assume that attackers can infiltrate the home
router. If tra ffic is obtained after NAT (tra ffic collection
method 2O), the effective classification of devices needs more
attention from the perspective of ISPs.
6.1.2 Device Behavior Identification
Different device behaviors could generate di fferent tra ffic
patterns. The triggering of device behaviors involves physical
control, LAN /W AN control, multimodal interaction, and
cloud API control (for more details, refer to Section 2.1).
Early works used statistical features to identify device
behavior [46, 99, 101, 107, 108]. Apthorpe et al. [107,
108] were among the early explorers who investigated the
impact of diverse user behaviors on tra ffic patterns. They
observed that user interactions can trigger abrupt changes
in tra ffic behavior. Subsequently, Pinheiro et al. [46]
found that devices show di fferent packet length patterns in
response to external commands. However, their scope of
tested event types remained limited and couldn’t distinguish
similar behaviors among devices of the same model, such as
opening/closing a speaker. Therefore, OConnor et al. [99]
embraced a broader spectrum of device behaviors. They
employed 13 features at the transport layer to characterize
triplets. Similarly, Charyyev and Gunes [101] also used
statistical features. Their contribution lies in evaluating
and comparing the performance of 10 ML algorithms in
classifying 128 device events stemming from 39 distinct
devices.
Compared to previous work, Trimananda et al. [51]
innovatively used packet-level features for the first time.
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 15
Table 7 Summary of device behavior identification literature
Literature Year
Contribution
Feature
Algorithm2 Data Source Communication Collection
Location4Algorithm1 Feature Dataset Type3 Name Public
Datasets
Self-
collection Wi-Fi Low-energy
[74] 2019 √ - - Packet TML
k-NN,RF,
DT,SVM,
Majority V oting
√ √ √ √ M1
[99] 2019 √ - - Flow,
Statistics TML RF YT √ √ √ M1M4
[100] 2020 √ √ - Packet,
Statistics TML RF - √ √ √ M1M2M3
[51] 2020 √ √ - Packet TML DBSCAN
UNSW,
YT, UNB Simulated
Office-Space Traffic dataset
√ √ √ M2M3
[101] 2020 √ - √ Statistics ML - J. Ren et.al.’s dataset - √ √ M1
[102] 2020 √ - - Packet TML RF - √ - √ M3
[103] 2021 √ √ - Packet NML -
PingPong, Mon(IoT)r,
UNSW, YT,
CICIDS2017 dataset
- √ √ M2M3
[104] 2022 √ √ - Packet NML - J. Ren et.al.’s dataset √ √ √ M1
[105] 2022 - - √ Packet NML - Zigator CRAWDAD dataset √ - √ M1M3
[106] 2023 - √ √ Flow TML RF - √ √ - M2
1 “Algorithm” denotes computational methods with provable improvements in either complexity (time /space) or task performance metrics.
2 The detail of algorithm of typical device behavior identification paper is shown in section 6.1.2
3 “TML” means traditional machine learning, “NML” means traditional analysis.
4 “ M1 −M5” corresponds to the five methods to acquire traffic in section 5.1.
They employ packet-pair sets between devices and servers
to distinguish device behaviors. However, it only works
with TCP protocol. Nonetheless, this method inspired
subsequent investigations. Some researchers draw inspiration
from PingPong and address its limitations [103, 104]. Duan
et al. [103] resolved the constraint of being limited to
TCP. Devices employing the UDP protocol can successfully
extract signatures. Another advantage is that their signatures
encompass more encoded information, making the impact
of lost packet pairs minimal. Wan et al. [104] introduced
a novel time-sensitive subsequence matching technique that
generates more comprehensive signatures.
In addition to research on the behaviors of Wi-Fi
devices, there is a growing body of work on studying the
behaviors of devices using low-energy protocols [100, 102,
105]. Acar et al. [100] proposed a “multi-stage privacy
attack” that encompasses the recognition of Wi-Fi, BLE,
and Zigbee devices. The tra ffic is represented as a triplet,
including timestamp, direction, and packet length, from
which statistical features are extracted. Gu et al. [102]
built a vulnerability detection framework called IoTGaze. It
constructed wireless context by extracting the packet-level
features of the device and identifying dependencies between
events. This context is then used to detect anomalies by
comparing it with the expected context. IoTGaze has an
98% accuracy in anomaly detection for 5 types of Zigbee
devices. Shafqat et al. [105] leveraged the low-power
characteristics of the Zigbee protocol that message lengths
are matched during encryption. It allows inference of
application layer (APL) commands from encrypted tra ffic.
Moreover, they found Zigbee devices periodically report
attributes like battery levels and temperature. This enables
attackers to infer device events from payload lengths and
reporting patterns.
Summary: We summarized the papers about device behavior
identification in Table 7. The table shows that packet-
level features are evidently more suitable than flow-level
features in device behavior identification. Many researchers
draw inspiration from the work by Trimananda et al. [51],
employing patterns concealed within request-reply packet
pairs to achieve this goal. Notably, DL techniques are rarely
used in the context of device behavior identification, which
may be related to the dimensions of the sample.
6.1.3 Hidden Device Detection
While CIoT devices bring convenience for users, unexpected
deployment of the device poses a threat to personal privacy.
Therefore, some researchers have begun investigating ways
to detect hidden IoT devices in unfamiliar environments.
Existing approaches relying on radio frequency receivers
are not entirely dependable, as they are susceptible to
interference from other legitimate RF devices such as
smartphones and PCs [109]. This situation o ffers an
opportunity for hidden device detection based on network
traffic. Taking cameras as an example, visual scenes
trigger di fferences between adjacent frames [110], which
can be used to confirm the potential cameras that are
operational effectively. This part presents relevant research
that utilizes passive tra ffic to detect hidden devices in
unfamiliar environments.
Due to concerns regarding unauthorized video recording,
some works [111, 112] focus on hiding cameras. Cheng
et al [111] proposed DeWiCam. It automatically analyzes
physical and MAC layer data within interested rooms. By ex-
ploiting camera compression and fragmentation techniques,
DeWiCam can employ di fferences in data transmission
during both transient and stable states as features. However,
this method heavily relies on common transmission modes,
which may not be generic across different manufacturers and
may change with camera firmware updates. Wu and Lagesse
[112] have designed a solution for dynamically detecting
the presence of uploading cameras. However, it relies on
16 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
comparing the similarity between user videos and videos
uploaded by hidden cameras. The di fficulty of detection
increases if a camera does not engage in uploading behavior.
Some studies [113, 114] have extended the scope of
detectable devices. Singh et al. [113] leveraged the concept
of “human motion” from Wu and Lagesse [112], which
involves activating trustworthy sensor values and observing
whether there exist similar traffic patterns from other devices.
Furthermore, they introduced an innovative sensor coverage
technique to locate the detected sensors. Sharma et al.
[114] addressed device diversity by extracting device-specific
attributes using multiple time scales. They also improved
upon previous spectrum sensing methods [115], utilizing
learned approximate transmission patterns over time to
acquire device data transmission timing and channels. Their
device fingerprint module computed features through an
XGBoost classifier. The channel-aware module identified
subsets of active channels through cyclic channel hopping.
Lastly, a rough device positioning was achieved through
RSSI-VIO.
Summary: Compared to regular device tra ffic analysis, the
existing literature primarily focuses on the link layer 802.11
protocol, resulting in a limited set of features from tra ffic.
Meanwhile, these methods often have limited usability,
requiring additional user assistance or being tailored to
specific operating systems and usage scenarios. More
importantly, the generalizability of the algorithm needs to be
improved.
6.2 User Activity Inference
The leakage of user privacy has remained a prominent
topic in network tra ffic analysis, such as user web browsing
history [116] or user interactions in mobile Apps [117, 118].
Attackers who understand user behavior can learn about the
living habits and further commit crimes [10].
Some researchers infer user activity from CIoT tra ffic,
who use fingerprints of devices and their behaviors to
establish a mapping relationship between traffic patterns and
user activities, including devices using Wi-Fi protocol [100,
110, 119] and low-energy protocol [120]. Li et al. [110]
discovered that di fferential coding in surveillance cameras
could inadvertently leak side-channel information. Distinct
body movements by users can lead to significant inter-frame
differences between packets. Consequently, they used frames
and applied k-NN and DBSCAN for activity recognition.
In addition to cameras, Acar et al. [100] have considered
scenarios with more device types. They modeled user
activities through multiple stages. The first three stages
identified the device type, whether it is active, and its
specific state. Then, they modeled user activities using
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) in the final stage. However,
this model only achieved a coarse-grained user behavior
representation, identifying aspects such as whether a user
remotely controlled a device or moved between locations.
Gu et al. [120] innovatively focused on 5 Zigbee devices
on the SmartThings platform. combined with the idea
of dynamic programming, they revealed the user activity
dependency, which can be used to infer the user’s living
habits and routines. However, they did not evaluate their
methods on Wi-Fi devices where their communications are
more complex. Based on the previous works, Wan et
al. [119] considered the presence of missing or unordered
device events and develops an approximate user activity
signature matching algorithm. Additionally, they design a
heuristic trimming step to address multiple matches involving
overlapping CIoT device events.
Different from the above work, some researchers [121–
124] studied the tra ffic behavior and privacy leakage prob-
lems on the App side. Subahi and Theodorakopoulos [121]
studied the interactions between users and CIoT devices and
the exposure of sensitive Personally Identifiable Information
(PII) and its type. They employ three random forest
classifiers to achieve this goal. However, this study
doesn’t provide a solution for companion Apps using fixed
certificates. Recent research [122–124] combines static
and traffic analysis techniques to uncover privacy risks and
device behaviors through companion Apps. IoTFlow [123]
utilizes Value Set Analysis (VSA) and Data-flow Analysis
(DFA) to reconstruct network protocols and endpoints, and
assess potential vulnerabilities. This approach focuses
on understanding how these apps communicate with IoT
devices and remote backends, identifying what data is shared
and with whom. Similarly, Babun et al. [124] introduce
IOTW ATCH, a dynamic analysis tool, which monitors and
collects data tra ffic during app execution, using Natural
Language Processing (NLP) techniques to classify sensitive
information and detect unauthorized data leaks. The tool
focuses on analyzing how IoT apps communicate and
transmit data, ensuring that sensitive information is not
shared with unauthorized parties. By leveraging tra ffic
analysis, IOTW ATCH enables real-time monitoring of IoT
app behavior, allowing users to better understand and control
their privacy by identifying potential leaks and unauthorized
recipients of their data. Chu et al. [122] have uncovered
similar security flaws in smart toys, such as unencrypted
data transmissions and the lack of authentication in toy-app
communications, violating privacy regulations like COPPA.
These studies demonstrate how mobile app analysis can
reveal privacy risks in networked devices.
Summary: Existing research shows that attackers can
commit crimes by analyzing user behavior. Researchers
try to infer user activities through device fingerprints and
traffic patterns, but there are limitations in device types and
protocols. The core challenge of inferring user privacy
from CIoT tra ffic lies in identifying dependencies between
device events and user activities. Combining app behavior
and network tra ffic analysis provides valuable insights into
user activity and privacy risks. Tools like IoTFlow and
IOTW ATCH use static and dynamic analysis to identify
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 17
Table 8 Summary of attacks on CIoT detection literature
Literature Year
Contribution
Feature
Algorithm2 Data Source Communication Collection
Location4Algorithm1 Feature Dataset Type3 Name Public
Datasets
Self-
collection Wi-Fi Low-energy
[125] 2021 √ - √ Statistics TML+RL
RF,
iForest,
MAB-RL
- √ √ √ M3
[126] 2019 - √ √ Flow,
Packet TML DT - √ √ √ M1
[127] 2020 √ √ -
Flow,
Packet,
Statistics
TML RF,
PCA - √ √ √ M1
[128] 2021 √ - √ Packet,
Statistics TML iForest,
DT - √ - √ M1
[129] 2022 - √ √ Statistics TML SVM - √ √ - M2
[130] 2018 √ - √ - NML DFA - √ - √ M1
[131] 2020 √ - - - NML LSH N-BaIoT - - √ M1
[132] 2020 √ √ -
Flow,
Packet,
Physical
NML - - √ - √ M3
1 “Algorithm” denotes computational methods with provable improvements in either complexity (time /space) or task performance metrics.
2 The detail of algorithm of typical CIoT attack detection paper is shown in section 6.3.1
3 “TML” means traditional machine learning, “NML” means traditional analysis, “RL” means reinforcement learning.
4 “ M1 −M5” corresponds to the five methods to acquire traffic in section 5.1.
privacy issues at scale. In the future, there is an opportunity
for a refined exploration of diverse device types and
events, particularly in multi-user scenarios, where di fferent
household members trigger devices at distinct time intervals,
just like Wan et al. [119] did.
6.3 Malicious Tra ffic Analysis
Like device fingerprinting, malicious tra ffic analysis is
another popular direction in CIoT tra ffic research. In this
subsection, we introduce the malicious traffic analysis papers
from two perspectives: detecting attacks on IoT and CIoT
botnet detection.
6.3.1 Detecting Attacks on CIoT
Due to low hardware configuration and long update
cycles, CIoT devices are vulnerable to various attacks,
including Scanning attacks, Brute Force attacks, DoS attacks,
and Cryptojacking [133]. Therefore, many researchers
devoted themselves to detecting attack traffic targeting CIoT
devices [125–132]. Most of these work provided the ability
to detect several general attacks [126, 127, 129, 131], as is
represented by DDoS and Scanning attacks. In 2019, Anthi
et al. [126] presented a NIDS with 3 layers to detect 12
attacks (e.g., DDoS, MITM, Scanning) in a CIoT network
environment. In 2020, Charyyev and Gunes [131] proposed
LSAD, based on LSH, to detect various attacks such as ARP
Spoofing and DDoS attacks. Unlike ML-based algorithms,
their method does not need to extract features from data.
Similarly, aiming at specific attacks, in 2022, Tekiner et al.
[129] presented a lightweight tra ffic-feature-based method
to detect CIoT Cryptojacking. They trained with an SVM
classifier and proved that their algorithm can obtain 99%
accuracy with one hour’s training data. Meanwhile, special
attacks targeting IoT devices are also detected. To solve
the IoT security sensor tampering issue, Pathak et al. [128]
developed two algorithms to detect sensor tampering attacks:
an unsupervised learning algorithm using iForest and a
supervised learning algorithm CART based on C4.5 DT.
Additionally, aiming at the attacks on low-energy CIoT
devices, researchers also came up with solutions [130,
132]. SmartApp, proposed by SmartThings, is a type
SmartAppGroovy SandboxSubscriptionProcessingCapabilityChecksSmartThings Cloud BackendDevicesSmartThings HubAESControl(SSL)SmartThings Mobile AppSmart HomeConfigure Devices Install SmartApps
Device HandlerGroovy Sandbox
Fig. 9 Architecture of SmartThings platform [130]
of program running on the cloud (as shown in Figure 9).
Targeting the issues of over-privileged permissions and
spoofing attacks within the application layer of SmartApp,
in 2018, Zhang et al. [130] conducted a notable study
centered around identifying malicious SmartApps via tra ffic
analysis. They first derived Deterministic Finite Automata
(DFA) from textual descriptions and user interfaces, to
model each App. By monitoring encrypted tra ffic captured
from wireless channels, they compare the observed state
transitions associated with a behavior to the predefined DFA.
If a match fails, it suggests the possibility of a malicious App.
Notably, this research targeted Zigbee and Z-Wave devices on
the SmartThings platform. However, the scalability of this
approach when dealing with more complex functionalities
and a greater number of states in Wi-Fi devices remains the
problem for further consideration.
When facing unknown attacks, researchers put forward
algorithms based on unsupervised learning [125, 127] and
18 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
RL [125] algorithms. In 2020, Wan et al. [127]introduced a
security monitoring system IoTArgos, which detects attacks
such as Scanning and Brute-force at the system, network, and
application layers of Smart Home IoT system by a supervised
learning algorithm RF, and integrated an unsupervised
learning algorithm principal component analysis (PCA) to
detect zero-day or unknown attacks. Through the evaluation,
IoTArgos can detect anomalous activities that target Smart
Home IoT devices with high precision & recall. In
2021, Heartfield et al. [125] presented MAGPIE, which is
able to autonomously adjust the function of its underlying
anomaly classification models to a smart home’s changing
conditions (such as newly-added devices, new automation
rules, and human interaction) to detect both known and
unknown threat in Smart Home IoT network. Researchers
applied a probabilistic cluster-based reward mechanism to
RL and combined them with supervised learning classifier
RF and unsupervised learning model iForest to classify
traffic. Evaluation experiments in a real-home smart home
environment containing Wi-Fi and Zigbee devices showed
that MAGPIE provides high accuracy.
Summary: Researchers have designed specific algorithms
to detect various attacks aiming at CIoT devices, as is shown
in Table 8. The intrusion detection research is mostly based
on non-ML and TML algorithms. Meanwhile, researchers
combine unsupervised learning algorithms into their research
to detect unknown threats. Nevertheless, due to potential
limitations in storage or data, DL-based detection methods
have not yet been investigated in the CIoT domain.
6.3.2 CIoT Botnet Detection
DDoS attacks, primarily launched by botnets consisting
of compromised CIoT devices like Mirai, Satori, and
BASHLITE, have posed a significant threat and resulted in
substantial damage to the network infrastructure. Among
them, the infamous Mirai botnet caused widespread network
disruptions [160]. According to the research methodologies,
we have categorized them into four types as outlined below.
1OTraditional ML-based Detection Methods. Among our
survey, many researchers use DT and RF algorithms to detect
CIoT botnet tra ffic in the research of CIoT botnet attack
detection based on TML [152, 154, 157]. In 2020, OKUR
and DENER [154] compared two di fferent ML algorithms
in detecting normal tra ffic and the attack tra ffic from botnet.
In their evaluation, the supervised learning algorithm (J48
DT) behaved better than the unsupervised learning algorithm
(Expectation Maximization).
Furthermore, some researchers [152, 157] concentrate on
the feature selection of the CIoT botnet tra ffic. In 2019,
Dwyer et al. [152] developed an analysis method based on
DNS to detect CIoT botnet. They put forward a DNS feature
set and evaluated a variety of TML classifiers, including
RF, k-NN, and Na¨ıve Bayes. RF classifier behaved the best
among them (shows 99% accuracy) and indicated that the
feature-set based on DNS can significantly reduce the time
of botnet detection.
In addition to the centralized approach, researchers have
also proposed distributed DDoS detection. In 2021, Doshi
et al. [156] proposed a novel NIDS based on a modified
version of the Online Discrepancy Test (ODIT) to timely
detect and mitigate Mongolian DDoS attacks characterized
by widely distributed attack sources and small attack scales.
The researchers used ak-NN-based algorithm to calculate the
abnormal traffic conditions at each node. They then used a
cooperative detector to aggregate the local statistical data of
each node and obtain the global statistical data to determine
whether an attack had occurred. This approach was validated
using the N-BaIoT dataset, IoT testbeds, and simulations,
proving its effectiveness against various DDoS scenarios.
Based on the detection of CIoT botnet, researchers
have made deeper discussion in some campaigns of CIoT
botnet [159]. In 2022, Torabi et al. [159] proposed
a system to detect and analyze scanning campaigns of
CIoT botnet. The author extracted the tra ffic from CIoT
devices using the Shodan search engine and over 6TB
network from the Dark web and detected compromised
devices by examining whether they emitted unsolicited
scanning. In their discussion, they pointed out that their
work may be a ffected by the dataset, which was collected
too early in August 2017. Some of these compromised
devices may have already been removed from the Internet.
Meanwhile, the researchers also detected and classified the
scanning campaigns in compromised CIoT devices based on
DBSCAN. Then, they grouped CIoT devices with similar
scanning behavior and showed the campaign feature of CIoT
botnet.
2ODL-based Detection Methods. Till now, as one of the
most popular types of ML algorithms, DL has plenty of
applications in botnet detection [136–149]. Among them,
most use NNs to detect the CIoT botnet. In 2019, Hwang et
al. [141] proposed a DL-based IoT malicious traffic detection
mechanism. Researchers extracted flow features with the
help of CNN and classified tra ffic with AE. The authors
evaluated the mechanism with the tra ffic dataset collected
from their Mirai network and USTC-TFC 2016 dataset and
pointed out that the mechanism can achieve nearly 100%
accuracy. To solve the problem that only known botnets
can be detected o ffline by existing technology, in 2020,
Kim et al. [142] proposed a new botnet detection method
based on the Recurrent Variational Autoencoder (RV AE). By
testing in scenarios (including botnets not used for training),
they demonstrated the robustness of the method in detecting
unknown botnets.
Till now, most of researchers that use DL to detect
CIoT botnets focused on the e ffect of their methods
without conducting comparative tests or only comparing their
methods with TML methods to show their advantages. Only
a few researchers compared their methods with other DL
methods in their evaluation; however, some of these methods
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 19
Table 9 Summary of the CIoT botnet detection literature
Literature Year
Contribution
Feature
Algorithm2 Data Source Communication Collection
Location4Algorithm1 Feature Dataset Type3 Name Public
Datasets
Self-
collection Wi-Fi Low-energy
[134] 2021 √ - - Packet NML - - √ √ - M1
[135] 2023 √ - - DL DL+RL CNN
NSL-KDD,
IoT-23,
N-BaIoT
- √ √ M4
[136] 2019 √ √ -
Flow,
Packet,
Statistics
DL+FL RNN - √ √ √ M2M5
[137] 2022 √ √ - DL DL+FL DNN - √ √ √ M1
[138] 2022 √ - - Statistics DL+FL AE - √ √ √ M1
[139] 2022 √ - - DL DL+FL CNN N-BaIoT - √ √ M1
[140] 2023 √ - - DL DL+FL AE N-BaIoT - √ - M1
[141] 2019 √ - - DL DL AE,
CNN USTC-TFC 2016 √ √ - M1
[142] 2020 √ √ - Flow,
Statistics DL V AE, RNN CTU-13 - √ √ M5
[143] 2020 √ - - DL DL AE Bot-IoT - √ √ M1M2
[144] 2020 √ - - Statistics DL GAN, AE Bot-IoT - √ - M1
[145] 2020 - √ - DL DL AE,
LSTM BoT-IoT - √ √ M1
[146] 2021 √ √ - Statistics DL RNN Kitsune - √ √ M1
[147] 2022 √ - - DL DL AE NSL-KDD and
five IoT botnet datasets - √ √ M4
[148] 2022 - √ - DL DL Transfomer N-BaIoT - √ √ M1
[149] 2023 - √ - DL DL CNN NSL-KDD,
BoT-IoT - √ √ M4
[150] 2022 √ √ - Statistics ML ELM MedBIoT,
ETF botnet dataset
√ √ √ M2
[151] 2019 √ - -
Flow,
Packet,
Statistics
TML RF, Bagging,
AdaBoost, V oting NSL-KDD - √ √ M4
[152] 2019 √ √ √ Packet,
Statistics,
Application
TML RF - √ √ √ M1
[153] 2020 √ - √ Statistics TML FCM - √ √ √ M1
[154] 2020 √ √ - Statistics TML DT N-BaIoT - √ - M1
[155] 2021 √ - - Statistics TML+FL k-NN N-BaIoT,
BoT-IoT - √ √ M1
[156] 2021 √ - √ Packet TML k-NN N-BaIoT - √ √ M1M4
[157] 2021 √ √ - Statistics TML DT, RF - - √ √ M1
[158] 2022 √ - - Flow TML Metric Learning N-BaIoT - √ √ M1
[159] 2022 √ - √ Flow TML DBSCAN - √ √ √ M5
1 “Algorithm” denotes computational methods with provable improvements in either complexity (time /space) or task performance metrics.
2 The detail of algorithm of typical CIoT botnet detection paper is shown in section 6.3.2
3 “TML” means traditional machine learning, “DL” means deep learning, “RL” means reinforcement learning, “ML” means machine learning, “FL”
means federated learning and “NML” means non-machine learning.
4 “ M1-M5” corresponds to the five methods to acquire traffic, see section 5.1.
did not train with datasets collected from CIoT devices.
In addition, the weak computing power and low storage
of devices in the CIoT network challenge the deployment
of DL models. To solve this problem, researchers tried to
combine FL with DL [136, 138, 139]. In 2022, Nishio et al.
[138] trained an anomaly detection FL model based on AE to
detect botnet traffic to detect easily infected software. When
assessed using their datasets collected from CIoT devices
and simulating malware tra ffic, their method demonstrated
enhanced e fficiency in detecting malware under reasonable
conditions. They got a more e fficient detection model than
AE and iForest models.
Based on the above algorithms, researchers conducted
further research to solve the problems of privacy leakage and
deployment difficulty. In 2022, Zhao et al. [139] pointed out
that FL-based NIDS may cause privacy breaches because the
transmitted model data may be used to recover private data.
Meanwhile, not independent and identically distributed (non-
IID) private data can a ffect FL in training e ffect, especially
the distil-based FL. The typically large models are di fficult
to deploy. To solve these problems, they proposed a Semi-
supervised FL (SSFL) NIDS scheme, based on knowledge
distillation of unlabeled data and used CNN as a classifier
and discriminator network to build the model. They evaluated
SSFL with the N-BaIoT dataset and showed SSFL has the
advantage in classifying performance and communication
overhead compared with common algorithms such as FL-
based algorithms and LSTM-based algorithms.
3ORL-based Detection Method. Some researchers have pro
ved that RL-based algorithms are e ffective in general tra ffic
analysis [135]. Baby et al. [135] designed an RL-based
NIDS. They adapt DRL algorithms to detect malicious DoS
and DDoS traffic raised by CIoT botnets. In their evaluation,
researchers tested DRL models in di fferent attacking and
defending situations with three datasets, NSL-KDD, IoT23,
and N-BaIoT, which are constructed mainly by botnets
formed by compromised CIoT devices and pointed out that
DRL algorithms are much more successful than TML and
DL algorithms.
4ONon-ML-based Detection Methods. In recent years,
ML-based botnet detection methods have become popular
among researchers; however, nonML-based methods are an
20 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
important complement of ML-based methods. In 2021,
Reed et al. [134] proposed a lightweight framework that
detects “Slow DoS” attacks (attacks that can only provide
low bandwidth and limited device resources) in resource-
constrained IoT networks. Their method is shown in
Figure 10. They analyze real-time IoT packets by two steps
based on a set of only four attributes and classify them into
three types: legitimate nodes (LN), genuine nodes with slow-
to-intermittent connections (SN) and malicious nodes (MN).
This lightweight NIDS framework can classify genuine nodes
experiencing slow or intermittent network connections and
malicious nodes effectively.
In addition, for emerging threats such as DDoS attacks on
5G networks, in 2023, Pineda et al. [161] proposed a defense
method against internal DDoS attacks in 5G core networks
by monitoring GPRS Tunneling Protocol User Plane (GTP-
U) tra ffic and deploying tra ffic filtering mechanisms using
Software Defined Networks (SDN). They deployed their
approach in a 5G testbed to block malicious IoT tra ffic in
real time. In their evaluation, they proved the performance
and efficiency of their method in factual scenarios.
In-bound packet
a candidate 
MN packet?
Permit SN&LN 
packet
No
a MN packet?
Yes
No
ServerDeny MN packet
Yes
Step 1:
Packet
Length
Analysis
Step 2:
Packet 
Delta 
Time 
Analysis
Fig. 10 Real-Time slow DoS detection framework [134]
Summary: As shown in Table 9, to date, researchers have
proposed various ML algorithms to detect CIoT botnet. In
the TML domain, DT and RF are predominantly employed,
while NNs are utilized in the DL domain. In addition,
researchers are adopting distribution strategies to address the
issue of ML model deployment. However, much of the
research lacks comparative experiments as their models are
not evaluated on the same datasets.
6.4 Measurement
Researchers did measurement studies on CIoT tra ffic in
order to gain insights into CIoT security and privacy
status. IoT backends, vendors, communication protocols
(especially TLS), IoT botnet, tra ffic destination, and private
data exposure are considered in the studies, summarized in
Table 10. We review current research in measurement from
two perspectives: security and privacy.
6.4.1 Security Perspective
Kumar et al. [162], Paracha et al. [163], Saidi et al. [164]
and Tagliaro et al. [165] discussed the security of CIoT from
different perspectives, including secure deployment, TLS
security, and backend. First, the general deployment and
security status of CIoT devices is studied. Kumar et al. [162]
collaborated with Avast Software, an antivirus company, and
conducted empirical analysis on traffic of 83 million devices
across 16 million homes. This study reveals the significant
regional variations in device types and manufacturers of
CIoT devices. Open services, weak default credentials, and
susceptibility to known attacks are also explored. As TLS
is a prominent security protocol used in CIoT, Paracha et
al. [163] analyzed two years of TLS tra ffic and assessed the
security of TLS connections established by IoT devices and
how these connections changed over time. They revealed
that TLS 1.2 was the most widely used version, while TLS
1.3 was less frequently adopted. Additionally, approximately
1/3 of devices were found to be vulnerable to interception
attacks during TLS practices, potentially exposing sensitive
data. Similarly, Huang et al. [56] expanded the dataset
through crowdsourcing. They developed a tool called “IoT
Inspector” to collect the tra ffic of 44,956 smart devices
worldwide. By analyzing the data, researchers found that
many device vendors used outdated TLS versions and that
third-party advertising and tracking services on TV were
prevalent. Saidi et al. [164] emphasized that the security and
functionality of IoT devices often rely on the IoT backend,
the server on which the device downloads resources or the
cloud-hosted for computing. By analyzing ISP’s passive
traffic data, they constructed a detailed map of IoT backend
servers and revealed the relationships among these backend
providers. Similarly to Saidi et al., Tagliaro et al. [165]
investigates the security of IoT backend servers, focusing on
the MQTT, CoAP, and XMPP protocols. The study finds that
9.44% of backends expose sensitive information, 30.38% of
CoAP backends are vulnerable to denial of service attacks,
and 99.84% of MQTT and XMPP backends do not use
secure transport protocols. Through large-scale datasets and
non-invasive measurements, the authors reveal significant
security vulnerabilities and provide recommendations for
improvement.
Some researchers [166–168] focused on the compromised
ones, especially the IoT botnet. Noroozian et al. [166]
evaluated the impact of two ISP security policies on Mirai.
By analyzing four years of dark web data, the research
revealed that the strategy of closing ports to reduce the attack
surface had no significant e ffect. In contrast, improving
overall network health and remediation e fforts significantly
reduced the infection rate of Mirai. Almazarqi et al.
[167] investigated the impact of AS structural properties
on the spread of Mirai-like IoT botnets. They pointed out
that commonly and widely used IP blacklist databases are
incapable of tracking concentrated botnets. At the same
time, they found that if the degree of an AS, that is, the
number of direct connections between this AS and other
ASes, is low, then the AS is more likely to become a host for
malware downloaders. Herwig et al. [168] investigated the
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 21
Table 10 Summary of measurement literature
Topic Paper Year Measurement Description
Security
[162] 2019 Evaluating the deployment of CIoT devices in di fferent regions and security issues that include open services and
weak default credentials.
[168] 2019 Investigating the Hajime botnet.
[56] 2020 Measuring insecure TLS implementations and the phenomena of third-party advertising and tracking services.
[163] 2021 Assessing the security of TLS connections established by IoT devices and how these connections changed over time.
[166] 2021 Evaluating the impact of two ISP security policies on Mirai: closing propagation ports of malicious software and
strengthening regulatory efforts.
[164] 2022 Constructing a detailed map of IoT backend servers and revealing the relationships among these backend providers.
[167] 2022 Investigating the impact of AS structural properties on the spread of Mirai-like IoT botnets.
Privacy
[12] 2019 The first group to study cross-regional data privacy on a large scale, which includes the destination of tra ffic,
encryption status, distribution of plaintext and ciphertext content, as well as the possible exposure of device
information.
[169] 2020 The privacy risk about speaker misactivations.
[170] 2020 A large-scale empirical measurement focusing on Home Security Cameras (HSCs) in China and identifying three
major behaviors that may leak user privacy: traffic surge, traffic regularity, and traffic rate change.
[171] 2021 Extracting the non-essential destinations of the device.
[13] 2023 Focusing on how the smart speaker ecosystem, especially Amazon Echo, collects, uses, and shares data.
[14] 2023 Measuring the privacy leakage of local network interactions of IoT devices.
Hajime botnet. Through active scanning and passive DNS
backscatter traffic collection, the study reveals that there is a
higher number of compromised IoT devices than previously
reported. These devices use a variety of CPU architectures,
and their popularity varies widely between countries.
Summary: CIoT tra ffic security measurement provides
valuable insights and guidance for building a more secure
CIoT ecosystem, as summarized in Table 10. Firstly, the
user data used for measurements should be legally authorized
and thoroughly desensitized to ensure user data privacy.
Secondly, current research (such as [166–168]) primarily
focuses on a few malicious software families, such as the
Mirai botnet. Future research should pay attention to various
types of malicious software families.
6.4.2 Privacy Perspective
In addition to security measurements, researchers are also
working to measure the leakage of private information by
devices from the traffic perspective.
“Mon(IoT)r Research Group” from Northeastern Univer-
sity has done a series of work related to CIoT privacy
measurement [12–14, 169, 171–173]. Ren et al. [12] are the
first to study cross-regional data privacy on a large scale.
By capturing traffic from 81 CIoT devices distributed across
laboratories in the UK and the US, they delved into aspects
like the destination of traffic, encryption status, distribution of
plaintext and ciphertext content, and the possible exposure of
device information. Next year, Dubois et al. [169] focused
on the privacy risk of speaker misactivations. By playing
different TV shows on Netflix around seven speakers for
134 hours, they found that smart speakers have a 95%
possibility of misactivations with unintentional and listed
the wake words that caused misactivations for the specific
speaker. Similarly, Iqbal et al. [13] focused on how the
smart speaker ecosystem, especially Amazon Echo. They
exposed that Alexa Echo smart speakers collect user data and
are used to target ads and track users’ interests, which may
raise concerns about privacy. Mandalari et al. [171] extracted
the non-essential destinations of the device. The study
found that 52% of devices communicated with non-essential
destinations. Among them, smart TVs and cameras contacted
numerous non-essential destinations. Di fferent from the
above studies, Girish et al. [14] measured possible privacy
leakage of local network interactions of CIoT devices. The
authors identified uncontrolled dissemination of sensitive
information and revealed that the companion apps and third-
party SDKs could potentially abuse user-space discovery
protocols to access local network information, resulting in
privacy infringements.
Another group of researchers [170] conducted a large-
scale empirical measurement focusing on Home Security
Cameras (HSCs) in China. They identified three main
behaviors that can leak user privacy: A sudden increase
in tra ffic indicates that video uploading is in progress; the
regularity change in traffic can be used to infer whether users
are active and specific activities; and the tra ffic rate change
can reflect changes in user activities.
Summary: The results of privacy measurements indicate
that users’ private information may be exposed through
CIoT devices. Various measurement studies have confirmed
that devices frequently connect to third-party servers, which
can lead to violations of local regulations such as GDPR.
Therefore, regulators must ensure that the statements about
third-party organizations in privacy policies are accurate and
that devices properly enforce these statements. Furthermore,
firmware updates on CIoT devices can alter existing
behaviors, necessitating evaluations of the impact of time on
22 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
Table 11 Summary of the pros and cons of different application goals
Application Goals Subcategories Advantages Limitations Applicable Scenarios
Device Fingerprinting
Device Identification
High accuracy (>90%), applicable to
various device types; capable of
identifying devices behind NAT;
suitable for large-scale networks.
Limited ability to differentiate devices
of the same type, limited support for
non-IP protocols, and challenges in
feature extraction.
Device and asset management; ISP
network monitoring; large-scale device
management.
Device Behavior Identification
High precision; capable of detecting
changes in device status through
behavioral characteristics; can identify
abnormal device behaviors.
Existing methods have poor scalability,
limited types of device behaviors,
sensitivity to packet loss, and difficulty
distinguishing similar behaviors.
Safety monitoring (e.g., device health
checks); user behavior analysis.
Hidden Device Detection Real-time detection of hidden devices
within a given environment.
Sensitive to environmental factors;
limited feature extraction capabilities;
lack of methods for low-power devices.
Prevent unauthorized device access and
safeguard user privacy.
User Activity Inference -
Supports Zigbee, BLE, and other
low-power device protocols, and
establishes a correlation between traffic
and user activities.
Low inference accuracy and high false
alarm rate in multi-device
environments.
Advertising targeting; user behavior
analysis; user privacy insights.
Malicious Traffic Analysis
Attack Detection Variety of detection methods.
Evaluated in many different datasets.
Lack of a unified evaluation standard
for attack detection. Variety of attacks on CIoT devices.
CIoT Botnet Detection
Garnered significant academic attention
and unified in research aims. High
precision. Public datasets cover various
types of devices.
Lots of studies based on DL may be
limited by the update cycle of datasets.
Detection timeliness is limited due to
the time-cost of model training.
Botnet attacks raised by compromised
CIoT devices.
Measurement
Security Suitable for large-scale data analysis to
identify device security vulnerabilities.
High data collection and processing
requirements; requires legal
authorization and compliance.
Evaluation of CIoT device security;
vulnerability discovery and mitigation.
Privacy
Suitable for home environments,
providing insights for user privacy
protection.
Involves user privacy, data collection
risks, and necessitates data
desensitization.
Risk assessment of data breaches on
devices; protection of user privacy.
measurement results. Additionally, many studies focus on
devices in the EU and the US but neglect other regions, such
as Asia.
Takeaways: This section categorizes the papers based on
their application goals, including device fingerprinting, user
activity inference, malicious tra ffic analysis, and measure-
ment, to answer RQ2. We compared the advantages, disad-
vantages, and application scenarios for di fferent application
purposes, as shown in Table 11. Existing research on device
fingerprinting and malicious tra ffic detection has made
significant progress, achieving high accuracy in laboratory
environments. However, the experimental environments
and evaluation criteria lack unified specifications, and most
studies do not include real-world scenario evaluations,
making it di fficult to compare model performance. In
practical applications, there is still room for improvement,
particularly in multi-protocol support, real-time detection,
and resource-constrained deployments.
7 Measures Against Traffic Analysis
In Section 6, we study the feasibility of constructing device
fingerprints using tra ffic patterns. Concurrently, a lot of
research has been conducted on methods to counteract
traffic fingerprinting, aiming to prevent the leakage of tra ffic
patterns. This section categorizes the principal techniques
employed in these studies, which encompass three main
research directions: tra ffic morphing, adversarial sample
generation, and differential privacy.
7.1 Tra ffic Morphing
Traffic morphing technology changes the inherent transmis-
sion pattern of tra ffic by filling the original tra ffic with
packets, which e ffectively prevents attackers from training
the model to identify the unique traffic patterns of the device,
as shown in Figure 11. Shenoi et al. [174] point out that
crafting an appropriate tra ffic fingerprint defense algorithm
may pose the following challenges: 1) defense mechanisms
must not interfere with device communication; 2) reducing
the network bandwidth and latency overhead caused by
defense mechanisms; 3) ensuring the robustness of defense
against adversarial training.
Traffic rate
Time
Traffic rate
Time
Morphing
Fingerprinting
Fingerprinting
Fig. 11 Traffic morphing
Early approaches to tra ffic morphing for CIoT devices
primarily utilized link padding. Specifically, link padding
can be categorized into Independent Link Padding (ILP)
and Dependent Link Padding (DLP) [175]. For ILP,
traffic morphing is based on preset values, while DLP
automatically adjusts according to current tra ffic patterns.
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 23
The implementation of these two methods can utilize ML
algorithms or through self-defined rules. DLP has been used
in the early days of network tra ffic development [176], but
it is not often used in CIoT. Apthorpe et al. [107] discussed
different methods to prevent the inference of tra ffic pattern.
They believe that the two most common methods, firewalls
and VPNs, have certain flaws. Therefore, they employ
ILP for tra ffic shaping, which called cover tra ffic. This
entails filling original tra ffic with a fixed rate according to
predetermined values to hide bursts. By implementing a
control filter, the priority of device traffic always exceeds that
of cover traffic, thus minimizing delay to the utmost extent.
However, cover tra ffic consumes substantial bandwidth
causing additional costs for consumers. To reduce bandwidth
consumption, Apthorpe et al. [175] presents an improvement
by introducing the concept of Random Traffic Padding (STP).
This approach injects upload and download traffic with equal
rate during user activity, and cyclically inserts this filler
data stream into the original tra ffic. So that adversaries
are unable to distinguish user activity from this mixture.
Although STP saves bandwidth compared to ILP, it still
need a significant volume of cover tra ffic to mask user
activities e ffectively. For devices such as cameras, which
involve audio-video streaming, STP may lead to substantial
bandwidth overhead. Further, Brahma and Sadhya [177]
introduced a novel defense mechanism that combines dummy
packet generation with dynamic link padding. When the state
of CIoT devices changes, dynamic traffic shaping introduces
dummy tra ffic during the duration of the signature. This
virtual traffic is randomly selected from the signature trace
pool of other devices. This approach successfully introduces
incorrect packet-level signatures, leading to a reduction in the
accuracy of device identification.
With the widespread application of ML, two defensive
approaches have emerged. One of the methods is Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [174, 178]. GANs consists
of two competing neural networks, namely the generator
and discriminator which promote model progress through
adversarial learning. Typically, the fingerprinting model is
the discriminator, while the generator produces adversarial
perturbation. The resultant generator is designed to
maximally disrupt fingerprinting. Hou et al. [178] assume
a black-box scenario where no prior knowledge about
the fingerprints exists. Firstly, they leveraged Knowledge
of model transferability to obtain an alternative model
capable of generating equivalent e ffects within the black-
box setting, achieved through training a multi-layer fully
connected neural network. In pursuit of evading device
identification, the author employs the training strategy of
generative models within GANs, manipulating tra ffic that
doesn’t impact the functionality of CIoT devices. Shenoi et
al. [174] introduced a novel tra ffic morphing system named
iPET, founded on adversarial perturbations. This system
employs a generative DL model to generate device-specific
defense perturbations. These perturbations intentionally
introduce randomness between model instances and permit
users to decide on a maximum bandwidth overhead. The
researchers consider a model based on feature aggregates and
a sequence-based device classifier. By deploying iPET, they
effectively reduced fingerprinting accuracy from 96.36% to
17%.
Another is RL [179]. At its core, agent autonomously
learns decision-making by observing feedback in the form
of reward signals. The fingerprint adversarial model uses
the probability of tra ffic originating from a certain device
as a reward value, aiming to reduce the accuracy of
the fingerprinting model. Notably, both GANs and RL
are founded on the current environmental context of the
fingerprints. These can be informed by prior knowledge
(white-box testing), or construct an alternative model to fit
fingerprints in black-box settings. In research by [179], traffic
morphing is performed at the router entry point. The core of
this approach lies in utilizing the Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradient (DDPG) RL algorithm to learn e ffective strategies
for altering CIoT tra ffic. The rewards needed for DDPG
training are derived from the Isolation Forest algorithm,
approximating the construction of the fingerprints. However,
this method falls under the category of gray-box techniques,
where privacy preservers possess partial knowledge of the
feature dimensions used by the fingerprints. Additionally, the
algorithm is evaluated based on a simplified fingerprinting
model, potentially imposing limitations in practical usage.
7.2 Adversarial Sample Generation
Due to the vulnerability of DL-based NIDS to adversarial
sample attacks, a threat that has been demonstrated to be
effective in various other domains, the same security concern
is extended to NIDS in the CIoT ecosystem. As shown in the
Figure 12, by adding tiny and well-designed perturbations to
the input data, it is possible to trick the model into producing
false predictions. Adversarial samples are often very similar
to the originals, and humans can’t perceive these changes, but
the model misclassifies them.
Class B
Class A Device A
Adversarial  
Model
Device B
Fingerprinting
Fig. 12 Adversarial sample generation
Han et al. [180] consider the gray-box and black-box
attack scenarios. In gray-box attacks, the attacker possesses
24 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
knowledge about the functionalities employed by the target
NIDS, whereas in black-box attacks, this knowledge is
entirely absent. Attackers feed pre-collected benign tra ffic
and attack-induced malicious tra ffic into GAN to generate
adversarial features. Subsequently, they employ a Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO) technique with predefined safe
operators to automatically mutate the malicious tra ffic,
iteratively selecting the best particles.
Further, Qiu et al. [181] explored the e fficient implemen-
tation of adversarial attacks in a fully black-box scenario for
NIDS. To begin, they employ model extraction techniques
to replicate an adversarial example (AE) generation model,
coupled with saliency maps to identify crucial features
affecting fingerprinting accuracy. Ultimately, they utilize
conventional AE to generate the necessary perturbations.
Through attack demonstrations on the prominent NIDS tool
Kitsune, the results indicate the success of perturbation.
7.3 Di fferential Privacy
Noise
Raw Traffic
 Padding Traffic
NIDS
Normal Traffic 
Abnormal Traffic
Fingerprinting
Fig. 13 Application of differential privacy in traffic
To keep the user’s privacy but avoid the negative impact
on the NIDS’s performance, researchers adopt Di fferential
Privacy (DP) techniques to shape the CIoT tra ffic. As
shown in Figure 13, with DP technology, CIoT tra ffic
can be randomized or perturbed, making it impossible
for external observers to easily analyze the user’s real
communication patterns, and at the same time, by controlling
the characteristics of noise so that it conforms to a certain
statistical distribution, so as not to mislead or reduce the
detection accuracy of NIDS.
Liu et al. [182] introduced the concept of smart
communities, which direct smart home tra ffic toward proxy
gateways before entering the Internet. By confusing
traffic generated by di fferent households, this secure and
privacy-preserving multi-hop routing method can ensure non-
linkability between source and destination. Notably, the
gateway they used is not only a communications device
but also a local computing platform. They deployed a DP
mechanism to help with obfuscation. The study by Duan et
al. [183] is a notable example of simultaneously considering
NIDS and user privacy protection, which also employed
DP. The tra ffic intended for obfuscation is generated in a
controlled manner without altering the individual system’s
spatiotemporal characteristics, thus not affecting the security
monitoring system. However, from an overall perspective,
the added noise can confuse attackers, preventing them
from distinguishing device behaviors. Its essence lies in
disrupting the robust correlation among tra ffic signatures,
device states, and device triggers. Similarly, Xiong et
al. [184] established a rigorous event-level DP model on
discrete event packet flows and proposes an event-level
(εs, εt)-DP shaping mechanism. This mechanism leverages
a discrete memoryless max(εs, εt
2 )-LDP channel c to conceal
packet sizes and time information, thereby mitigating tra ffic
analysis attacks.
Summary: This section introduces traffic morphing-related
works that defend against tra ffic analysis. Current tra ffic
morphing techniques often come with network performance
overheads or a negative impact on NIDS’s reliability. For
instance, traffic padding increases network bandwidth usage,
and adversarial sample generation may lower the detection
performance of NIDS. Future research could consider
adaptive traffic morphing systems that select the most suitable
morphing strategies based on the dynamic characteristics of
CIoT tra ffic. Meanwhile, attackers continuously develop
new tra ffic analysis techniques to break tra ffic morphing.
Researchers need to continually improve the robustness of
traffic morphing. For example, exploring tra ffic features
based on the protocol level or application level to enhance
the e ffectiveness of tra ffic morphing. On the other hand,
traffic morphing techniques based on adversarial samples
push forward the improvement of robust tra ffic analysis AI
models. Potential directions in the future include the use of
GNN to capture higher-order dependencies and adversarial
training for network traffic analysis.
8 Challenges and Future Research
Despite significant contributions by researchers in the field
of CIoT tra ffic security and privacy, it still reveals that
challenges remain within this domain. Therefore, in this
section, we summarize the challenges and future research
directions from the perspective of CIoT tra ffic analysis
processes, specifically focusing on four key aspects: CIoT
traffic collection, CIoT traffic processing, analysis algorithm,
and new applications. This analysis aims to address RQ3.
8.1 CIoT Tra ffic Collection
Compared to PC and mobile apps, CIoT devices exhibit many
special characteristics, which influence the tra ffic collection
process, as discussed in Section 5.4.1. In the following part,
we summarize potential future research directions regarding
CIoT traffic collection.
(1) More Comprehensive Datasets. Firstly, compared with
general network analysis like website or application finger-
printing, establishing a physical CIoT environment or testbed
is more time-consuming and costly, especially considering
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 25
numerous CIoT vendors, types, and models. Secondly, as
outlined in Section 5.1.2, despite researchers establishing
several datasets independently and even Huang et al. [56]
collected traffic of thousands of devices by crowdsourcing,
an up-to-date, unified, and large-scale CIoT tra ffic dataset
available for researchers is still important. Considering
the distinctive feature of CIoT devices, the dataset ought
to span the entire CIoT lifecycle and be labeled with
fine granularity, thereby fulfilling diverse future application
objectives. To address this, we suggest developing an open-
source collaborative platform that encourages researchers
and manufacturers to contribute data, ensuring dynamic
updates while preserving privacy through techniques like
differential privacy. Additionally, an automated data labeling
tool leveraging LLM could significantly reduce manual effort
and improve dataset quality. Lastly, as shown in Table 3,
almost all commonly used CIoT datasets are self-collected
in laboratory settings. Therefore, how to construct an open
real-world dataset that does not expose any users’ privacy
to support evaluations of various methods in practice is a
valuable topic.
(2) Cost-minimal CIoT Tra ffic Collection Methods. As
discussed above, building a comprehensive CIoT tra ffic
dataset is essential but remains time-consuming and costly.
This complexity is due to the diverse device interaction
modes, such as physical control and automation rules, as
discussed in Section 2.1. Ren et al. [12] to some extent
automated the collection process by Monkey Application
Exerciser included in Android Studio. However, not all
interaction modes can be fully simulated in an automated
way, e.g., the device binding process. Therefore, automating
the tra ffic collection process to minimize human labor is
a promising future direction. Researchers can develop
automatic mechanical operation devices to simulate diverse
physical interactions. Meanwhile, tra ffic simulation gen-
eration can e ffectively reduce economic costs, particularly
for network evaluation and the construction of datasets that
contain malicious tra ffic [185, 186]. However, constructing
data sets through virtual environments remains uncommon
in the CIoT domain, possibly due to various modes of
user interaction and device types. Consequently, simulating
realistic CIoT scenarios and generating realistic tra ffic
remains an unresolved challenge. Firmware rehosting may
be a solution to this challenge.
(3) Non-IP Tra ffic. Most works focus on analyzing the
TCP/IP network layer tra ffic and above. However, as for
non-IP (Zigbee, Z-Wave, and Bluetooth) devices, existing
works [44,46,82,83] often use a smart hub and collect tra ffic
at the router, which only captures IP packets. In scenarios
where the attacker is near the victim’s home, significant
information about the user and devices can be inferred from
link-layer packets. For instance, Gu et al. [120] successfully
inferred user behaviours through Zigbee packets. Thus, there
is a pressing need for a comprehensive CIoT tra ffic dataset
containing various communication protocols and techniques,
including Zigbee, Z-wave, Bluetooth, and 4G /5G. This will
enable future works to analyze and infer information across
different scenarios. One solution is to develop a hybrid traffic
collection system that can capture non-IP traffic (e.g., Zigbee,
Z-Wave) at various positions in the network.
(4) Malicious CIoT Tra ffic. Catillo et al. [187] show
that the malicious tra ffic datasets have certain limitations.
The origins of the CIoT botnet attack are widespread, and
the number is substantial, making the creation of an up-
to-date dataset di fficult. Meanwhile, most researchers rely
on popular third-party datasets, such as BotIoT, N-BaIoT,
and IoT23, to evaluate their methods. Therefore, it remains
uncertain if their methods can reliably identify attack tra ffic
from previously unidentified botnets. To overcome this,
we suggest deploying honeypots to capture real-time botnet
traffic and create a dynamically updated malicious tra ffic
dataset.
8.2 CIoT Tra ffic Processing
(1) Local Tra ffic. In Section 5.4, we analyze the
differences in tra ffic between CIoT devices and traditional
computing devices. Researchers should consider these
distinct characteristics when designing and implementing
traffic analysis methods. We observed that most research
focuses on analyzing the communication tra ffic between
CIoT devices and the cloud. Compared to other studies,
there is a scarcity of research on local communication
traffic analysis between CIoT devices and companion apps,
although local communication could also show a lot of
information (as Girish et al. [14] studied). Therefore,
effectively analyzing local communications is a valuable
research topic. This will help detect potential vulnerabilities
that do not rely on cloud services. We propose developing
a lightweight local tra ffic analysis framework using edge
computing to process and analyze tra ffic in real time.
Additionally, graph neural networks could be employed to
model complex interactions between devices.
(2) Vendor Proprietary Protocols. Most works learn
information about devices by standard protocols [49, 85,
86]. However, due to security and real-time communication
requirements, many manufacturers opt for proprietary or
private encryption protocols based on UDP. These protocols
often render regular monitoring tools ine ffective. Conse-
quently, developing new techniques with protocol reverse
engineering ability becomes essential for analyzing these
protocols. For example, combining symbolic execution and
dynamic analysis to decode proprietary protocols.
(3) Feature Optimization. It is necessary to continuously
optimize the CIoT tra ffic feature processing using new
technologies in the field of AI. Frontier research on network
traffic has proposed many methods of tra ffic representation.
For instance, Xie et al. [188] employed more robust TLS
features. Bronzino et al. [189] presented a framework
and system that evaluates the system-level costs of various
26 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
traffic representation methods. The work by Zola et
al. [190] employed a graph-based approach that addresses
class imbalance issues and enhances the supervised node
behavior classification. Holland et al. [191] automated
various aspects of tra ffic analysis and introduced the tool
nPrint for generating unified packet representations. In
addition to these cutting-edge approaches in network tra ffic,
a variety of feature selection optimization methods in ML
could be employed, including tree-based feature importance
evaluation algorithms, recursive feature elimination (RFE),
LASSO, GA, etc.
8.3 Analysis Algorithm
(1) Open-world Problem. Most studies we reviewed
evaluate their algorithms based on lab-crafted traffic datasets.
However, there are numerous types and models of CIoT
devices. The dataset for training the model cannot cover all
CIoT devices worldwide. Thus, the model’s ability to identify
devices in an open world needs to be e ffectively verified
in the future. A promising direction would be to focus on
Transfer Learning (TL) techniques that can enable the model
to recognize unknown devices based on previously observed
traffic patterns.
(2) Challenges of Edge and Multifunctional CIoT Devices.
Existing research has not sufficiently addressed the potential
confusion in tra ffic patterns caused by multifunctional and
edge CIoT devices. Smart TVs, as typical edge CIoT
devices, mostly feature Android-based operating systems,
which could cause their traffic characteristics to be confused
with the background tra ffic of devices such as smartphones.
This overlap may obscure the intrinsic features of smart TVs.
Moreover, analyzing the tra ffic of multifunctional devices,
like smart TVs with voice assistance and sweeping robots
that combine cameras, brings new challenges to existing
algorithms focusing on single-function devices. For example,
as smart TVs add functions like voice assistants, their tra ffic
becomes more like that of smart speakers, deepening the
confusion. Therefore, the algorithm should isolate tra ffic
patterns specific to each function (e.g., voice recognition vs.
video streaming) to prevent tra ffic from being mislabeled or
misclassified. Collaborative filtering or multi-view learning
could be useful to distinguish these mixed functionalities.
(3) Unified Standard Evaluation. Our survey noted
that the majority of studies lack comparative evaluations
within a unified standard test environment (both datasets
and algorithms), as outlined in 8.1. Unfortunately, the
fragmented CIoT ecosystem results in haphazard evaluations.
We recommend establishing a unified standard evaluation
framework for algorithms addressing the same objective.
Such a framework would facilitate more reliable comparisons
across different studies, promote transparency, and accelerate
the development of more effective solutions.
(4) Applying New AI Techniques. Since 2023, the
success of large language models (LLM) [192], particularly
ChatGPT, has attracted researchers to apply them in solving
issues across various computer science domains. There
is growing interest in utilizing LLM for tra ffic analysis
applications. For instance, the recent release of Tra ffic
LLM by Tsinghua University 4), the use of LLMs to
automatically analyze HTTP banners in internet scans [193],
optimizing network performance [194], and malicious traffic
analysis [195, 196] are notable examples. The adaptability
and e fficiency of LLMs can significantly enhance the
processing and interpretation of complex tra ffic patterns.
However, the application of LLMs in the CIoT domain
remains relatively limited. This may be due to the diversity
of CIoT devices, which increase the di fficulty of data
standardization. Additionally, the resource constraints in
CIoT environments pose challenges for directly applying
these models. Researchers should explore more customized
and lightweight models to meet the unique needs of CIoT.
Another way is using optimization techniques such as
pruning or knowledge distillation to reduce resource usage.
(5) Applications in Edge Computing Scenarios. Edge
computing integrates big data, IoT, and AI technologies,
enabling applications to operate on local servers and
bringing computation closer to terminal devices [197,
198]. This approach not only reduces data transmission
costs but also enhances network security by minimizing
reliance on central cloud infrastructures, thereby lowering
the risk of DoS attacks in global data centers. As data
transmission increasingly shifts towards the network edge
rather than central servers or data centers, edge computing
can substantially decrease packet header lengths and network
latency. This brings advantages to deploying models on
devices and helps develop distributed algorithms, which
further enables network management and security policies to
adapt more rapidly to dynamic network conditions.
8.4 New Applications
CIoT is a system that involves multiple components working
collaboratively. In addition to the application goals
introduced in Section 6, tra ffic analysis could possibly
provide more insight into the CIoT ecosystem. Currently,
utilizing companion applications to understand CIoT devices
is becoming increasingly common. Security testing and
research on the device encounter limitations due to firmware
not being public [199]. Therefore, certain studies have
resorted to static analysis of companion applications to
identify potential risks related to user data exposure [123,
200], while others employ these applications as proxies for
fuzz testing [201]. We believe that the tra ffic of CIoT
companion apps is a valuable research area for assessing
the CIoT ecosystem, e.g., the supply chain ecosystem.
Furthermore, existing research indicates that CIoT tra ffic
4)Traffic LLM by Tsinghua University, visit https://github.com/
ZGC-LLM-Safety/TrafficLLM
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 27
exposes much private information. Besides the existing
goals (fingerprinting device and user behaviors), the tra ffic
could possibly be used to fingerprint more CIoT applications
that expose user privacy, such as interactions with smart
voice assistants and automation rules [202] (e.g., IFTTT).
Studies have shown that IFTTT is vulnerable to malware
flows [202, 203]. Therefore, the security of third parties
who have the authority to cloud API control the device also
needs to be studied urgently. Third, tra ffic analysis can also
help identify vulnerabilities in CIoT, as some researchers
demonstrated [36, 204]. Given that recent studies have
highlighted numerous security concerns, tra ffic analysis of
the CIoT could provide more significant information to
discover vulnerabilities.
Last but not least, for detecting DDoS attacks on 5G
networks and devices, some researchers have proposed some
algorithms as is shown in Section 6.3. However, till now,
researchers mostly extract 5G attacks’ feature from signaling
changes because DDoS attack on 5G systems mainly happens
on the control plane [205], there is still a lot of future work to
be done in the field of tra ffic. Meanwhile, APT (advanced
persistent threats) attacks targeting CIoT devices are also
worth paying attention to. Researchers have proposed
different detection methods based on both DL [206] and
DRL [207]. Besides the exploitation of compromised devices
for launching DDoS attacks as discussed in Section 6.3.2,
attackers may achieve more covert and persistent threats
through CIoT device infiltration. For instance, tampering
with smart home sensor data like temperature thresholds or
smoke alarm configurations to fabricate false environmental
conditions could raise problems such as misleading smart air-
condition-systems into overload operations that may result
in circuit failures. Finally, we mentioned in Section 5 that
existing studies have shown that CIoT device firmware is not
updated frequently, but there is currently no work specifically
studying whether the traffic model of CIoT will change with
a major update, which will directly a ffect the timeliness of
the model that use traffic patterns as testing criteria.
Takeaways: In this section, we summarize the challenges
and future directions in CIoT tra ffic analysis through three
key steps and application scenarios to answer RQ3. Firstly,
given the diverse CIoT devices, there is a need to develop
a more comprehensive dataset to facilitate the establishment
of a standard evaluation framework. Secondly, the unique
characteristics of CIoT traffic, such as local communication
and proprietary protocols, necessitate a greater focus on
feature optimization to capture its complexity. Furthermore,
with the rapid advancement of technologies like LLM and
edge computing, researchers should explore customized and
lightweight algorithms to address the evolving CIoT tra ffic
in an open world. Finally, attention must be given to under-
researched application scenarios, such as the security of
IFTTT and the impact of device updates on tra ffic patterns.
These efforts will accelerate the development of safer and
more efficient solutions in the CIoT field.
9 Conclusion
We surveyed 310 papers on tra ffic analysis in the field
of CIoT security and privacy from 52 conferences and
journals of high reputation. We reviewed the literature
according to the proposed three RQs and answered them in
the takeaways. First, we summarize the process of CIoT
traffic analysis in three steps and identify new characteristics
of CIoT traffic, especially the complexity of traffic collection
and processing. Next, we looked at the four application
goals of current studies and concluded their contributions
and deficiencies, and classified the measures against tra ffic
analysis. Finally, we summarized the challenges and
pointed out future directions. Compared to general tra ffic
analysis, network architectures, communication protocols,
and application scenarios of CIoT devices present new
challenges in tra ffic analysis. We hope to inspire more
researchers to analyze the security and privacy issues of CIoT
from a traffic perspective.
Acknowledgements This work is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No.62032012, 62432012, 62102198), the
National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFB3103202), and the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (079-63243152).
References
1. Alzahrani A I A, Chauhdary S H, Alshdadi A A. Internet of things
(iot)-based wastewater management in smart cities. Electronics,
2023, 12(12)
2. Kumar B S, Ramalingam S, Divya V , Amruthavarshini S,
Dhivyashree S. Lora - iot based industrial automation motor speed
control monitoring system. In: 2023 International Conference on
Intelligent Data Communication Technologies and Internet of Things
(IDCIoT). 2023, 11–15
3. Guenfaf Y , Zafoune Y . An iot ml-based system for energy e fficiency
in smart homes. In: 2023 IEEE World AI IoT Congress (AIIoT).
2023, 198–203
4. Mehta K, Gaur S, Maheshwari S, Chugh H, Kumar M a. Big data
analytics cloud based smart iot healthcare network. In: 2023 7th
International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics
(ICOEI). 2023, 437–443
5. Naeini P E, Bhagavatula S, Habib H, Degeling M, Bauer L, Cranor
L F, Sadeh N. Privacy expectations and preferences in an IoT world.
In: Thirteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS
2017). July 2017, 399–412
6. Zeng E, Mare S, Roesner F. End user security & privacy concerns
with smart homes. 2017, 65–80
7. Park S, Lenhart A, Zimmer M, Vitak J. ”nobody’s happy”:
Design insights from Privacy-Conscious smart home power users on
enhancing data transparency, visibility, and control. In: Nineteenth
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2023). August
2023, 543–558
28 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
8. Tawalbeh L, Muheidat F, Tawalbeh M, Quwaider M. Iot privacy and
security: Challenges and solutions. Applied Sciences, 2020, 10(12):
4102
9. Jia Y , Yuan B, Xing L, Zhao D, Zhang Y , Wang X, Liu Y , Zheng K,
Crnjak P, Zhang Y , others . Who’s in control? on security risks of
disjointed iot device management channels. In: Proceedings of the
2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security. 2021, 1289–1305
10. Jia Y , Xing L, Mao Y , Zhao D, Wang X, Zhao S, Zhang Y . Burglars’
IoT paradise: Understanding and mitigating security risks of general
messaging protocols on IoT clouds. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP). 2020, 465–481
11. Wang Q, Ji S, Tian Y , Zhang X, Zhao B, Kan Y , Lin Z, Lin C, Deng S,
Liu A X, others . MPInspector: A systematic and automatic approach
for evaluating the security of IoT messaging protocols. In: 30th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21). 2021, 4205–
4222
12. Ren J, Dubois D J, Cho ffnes D, Mandalari A M, Kolcun R,
Haddadi H. Information exposure from consumer iot devices: A
multidimensional, network-informed measurement approach. In:
Proceedings of the Internet Measurement Conference. 2019, 267–279
13. Iqbal U, Bahrami P N, Trimananda R, Cui H, Gamero-Garrido
A, Dubois D J, Cho ffnes D, Markopoulou A, Roesner F, Shafiq
Z. Tracking, profiling, and ad targeting in the alexa echo smart
speaker ecosystem. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM on Internet
Measurement Conference. 2023, 569–583
14. Girish A, Hu T, Prakash V , Dubois D J, Matic S, Huang D Y , Egelman
S, Reardon J, Tapiador J, Cho ffnes D, Vallina-Rodriguez N. In the
Room Where It Happens: Characterizing Local Communication and
Threats in Smart Homes. In: Proc. of the Internet Measurement
Conference (IMC’23). 2023
15. Tan Z, Jamdagni A, He X, Nanda P, Liu R P. A system for denial-
of-service attack detection based on multivariate correlation analysis.
IEEE transactions on parallel and distributed systems, 2013, 25(2):
447–456
16. Seliem M, Elgazzar K, Khalil K. Towards privacy preserving iot
environments: a survey. Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing, 2018, 2018: 1–15
17. Gupta S, Ghanavati S. Privacy in the internet of things: Where do we
stand? a systematic literature review. 2022
18. Zavalyshyn I, Legay A, Rath A, Rivi `ere E. Sok: Privacy-enhancing
smart home hubs. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies,
2022, 4: 24–43
19. Alrawi O, Lever C, Antonakakis M, Monrose F. Sok: Security
evaluation of home-based iot deployments. In: 2019 IEEE
symposium on security and privacy (sp). 2019, 1362–1380
20. Abosata N, Al-Rubaye S, Inalhan G, Emmanouilidis C. Internet of
things for system integrity: A comprehensive survey on security,
attacks and countermeasures for industrial applications. Sensors,
2021, 21(11): 3654
21. Wang Z, Liu D, Sun Y , Pang X, Sun P, Lin F, Lui J C, Ren K.
A survey on iot-enabled home automation systems: Attacks and
defenses. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2022
22. Papadogiannaki E, Ioannidis S. A survey on encrypted network
traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 2021, 54(6): 1–35
23. Shen M, Ye K, Liu X, Zhu L, Kang J, Yu S, Li Q, Xu K.
Machine learning-powered encrypted network tra ffic analysis: a
comprehensive survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
2022
24. Shahraki A, Abbasi M, Taherkordi A, Jurcut A D. A comparative
study on online machine learning techniques for network tra ffic
streams analysis. Computer Networks, 2022, 207: 108836
25. Mathews N, Holland J K, Oh S E, Rahman M S, Hopper N, Wright M.
Sok: A critical evaluation of efficient website fingerprinting defenses.
In: 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 2023, 969–
986
26. Bhatiaa A, Bahugunaa A A, Tiwaria K, Haribabua K, Vishwakarmab
D. A survey on analyzing encrypted network traffic of mobile devices.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12352, 2020
27. S ´anchez P M S, Valero J M J, Celdr ´an A H, Bovet G, P ´erez
M G, P ´erez G M. A survey on device behavior fingerprinting:
Data sources, techniques, application scenarios, and datasets. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2021, 23(2): 1048–1077
28. Jmila H, Blanc G, Shahid M R, Lazrag M. A survey of smart home
iot device classification using machine learning-based network traffic
analysis. IEEE Access, 2022, 10: 97117–97141
29. Tahaei H, Afifi F, Asemi A, Zaki F, Anuar N B. The rise of tra ffic
classification in iot networks: A survey. Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, 2020, 154: 102538
30. Deri L, Sartiano D. Using dpi and statistical analysis in encrypted
network tra ffic monitoring. International Journal for Information
Security Research, 2020, 10: 932–943
31. Alzubi J, Nayyar A, Kumar A. Machine learning from theory to
algorithms: an overview. In: Journal of physics: conference series.
2018, 012012
32. Samuel A L. Some studies in machine learning using the game of
checkers. IBM Journal of research and development, 1959, 3(3): 210–
229
33. LeCun Y , Bengio Y , Hinton G. Deep learning. nature, 2015,
521(7553): 436–444
34. Watkins C J C H. Learning from delayed rewards. 1989
35. Duan C, Li S, Lin H, Chen W, Song G, Li C, Yang J, Wang Z. Iota:
Fine-grained traffic monitoring for iot devices via fully packet-level
models. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
2023
36. James F, Ray I, Medhi D. Worst attack vulnerability and fortification
for iot security management: An approach and an illustration
for smart home iot. In: NOMS 2023-2023 IEEE /IFIP Network
Operations and Management Symposium. 2023, 1–6
37. Charyyev B, Gunes M H. Locality-sensitive iot network tra ffic
fingerprinting for device identification. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2021, 8(3): 1272–1281
38. Charyyev B, Gunes M H. Iot tra ffic flow identification using locality
sensitive hashes. In: ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC). 2020, 1–6
39. Koroniotis N, Moustafa N, Sitnikova E, Turnbull B. Towards the
development of realistic botnet dataset in the internet of things
for network forensic analytics: Bot-iot dataset. Future Generation
Computer Systems, 2019, 100: 779–796
40. Zhang K, Marchiori A. Crowdsourcing low-power wide-area iot
networks. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications (PerCom). 2017, 41–49
41. Gan X, Li Y , Huang Y , Fu L, Wang X. When crowdsourcing meets
social iot: An e fficient privacy-preserving incentive mechanism.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2019, 6(6): 9707–9721
42. De Keersmaeker F, Cao Y , Ndonda G K, Sadre R. A survey of public
iot datasets for network security research. IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, 2023, 25(3): 1808–1840
43. Moore A, Zuev D, Crogan M. Discriminators for use in flow-based
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 29
classification. Technical report, 2013
44. Aksoy A, Gunes M H. Automated iot device identification using
network traffic. In: ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC). 2019, 1–7
45. Fan L, Zhang S, Wu Y , Wang Z, Duan C, Li J, Yang J. An iot device
identification method based on semi-supervised learning. In: 2020
16th International Conference on Network and Service Management
(CNSM). 2020, 1–7
46. Pinheiro A J, de M. Bezerra J, Burgardt C A, Campelo D R.
Identifying iot devices and events based on packet length from
encrypted traffic. Computer Communications, 2019, 144: 8–17
47. Bai L, Yao L, Kanhere S S, Wang X, Yang Z. Automatic device
classification from network tra ffic streams of internet of things. In:
2018 IEEE 43rd Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN).
2018, 1–9
48. Ahmed D, Das A, Za ffar F. Analyzing the feasibility and general-
izability of fingerprinting internet of things devices. Proceedings on
Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2022, (2)
49. Perdisci R, Papastergiou T, Alrawi O, Antonakakis M. Iotfinder:
Efficient large-scale identification of iot devices via passive dns traffic
analysis. In: 2020 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Privacy (EuroS&P). 2020, 474–489
50. Sivanathan A, Gharakheili H H, Loi F, Radford A, Wijenayake
C, Vishwanath A, Sivaraman V . Classifying iot devices in smart
environments using network traffic characteristics. IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, 2019, 18(8): 1745–1759
51. Trimananda R, Varmarken J, Markopoulou A, Demsky B. Packet-
level signatures for smart home devices. In: Network and Distributed
Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium. 2020
52. Campos D, OConnor T. Towards labeling on-demand iot tra ffic. In:
Cyber Security Experimentation and Test Workshop. 2021, 49–57
53. Miettinen M, Marchal S, Hafeez I, Asokan N, Sadeghi A R, Tarkoma
S. Iot sentinel: Automated device-type identification for security
enforcement in iot. In: 2017 IEEE 37th international conference on
distributed computing systems (ICDCS). 2017, 2177–2184
54. Bhandari G, Lyth A, Shalaginov A, Grønli T M. Distributed
deep neural-network-based middleware for cyber-attacks detection in
smart iot ecosystem: A novel framework and performance evaluation
approach. Electronics, 2023, 12(2): 298
55. Meidan Y , Bohadana M, Mathov Y , Mirsky Y , Shabtai A,
Breitenbacher D, Elovici Y . N-baiot—network-based detection of iot
botnet attacks using deep autoencoders. IEEE Pervasive Computing,
2018, 17(3): 12–22
56. Huang D Y , Apthorpe N, Li F, Acar G, Feamster N. Iot inspector:
Crowdsourcing labeled network tra ffic from smart home devices at
scale. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and
Ubiquitous Technologies, 2020, 4(2): 1–21
57. Tavallaee M, Bagheri E, Lu W, Ghorbani A A. A detailed analysis of
the kdd cup 99 data set. In: 2009 IEEE symposium on computational
intelligence for security and defense applications. 2009, 1–6
58. Sarker I H. Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world applications
and research directions. SN computer science, 2021, 2(3): 160
59. Carvalho D V , Pereira E M, Cardoso J S. Machine learning
interpretability: A survey on methods and metrics. Electronics, 2019,
8(8): 832
60. Safavian S, Landgrebe D. A survey of decision tree classifier
methodology. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
1991, 21(3): 660–674
61. Cortes C, Vapnik V . Support-vector networks. Machine learning,
1995, 20: 273–297
62. Breiman L. Random forests. Machine learning, 2001, 45: 5–32
63. Cover T, Hart P. Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE
transactions on information theory, 1967, 13(1): 21–27
64. Fukushima K. Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network
model for a mechanism of pattern recognition una ffected by shift in
position. Biological cybernetics, 1980, 36(4): 193–202
65. Scarselli F, Gori M, Tsoi A C, Hagenbuchner M, Monfardini G. The
graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks,
2008, 20(1): 61–80
66. Lipton Z C, Berkowitz J, Elkan C. A critical review of
recurrent neural networks for sequence learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.00019, 2015
67. Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory. Neural
computation, 1997, 9(8): 1735–1780
68. Sun H, Han L, Yang R, Ma X, Guo J, Zhou B. Exploit reward shifting
in value-based deep-rl: Optimistic curiosity-based exploration and
conservative exploitation via linear reward shaping. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022, 35: 37719–37734
69. Arulkumaran K, Deisenroth M P, Brundage M, Bharath A A.
A brief survey of deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.05866, 2017
70. Mnih V , Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Graves A, Antonoglou I, Wierstra
D, Riedmiller M. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013
71. Roesch M, others . Snort: Lightweight intrusion detection for
networks. In: Lisa. 1999, 229–238
72. Kumar V , Sangwan O P. Signature based intrusion detection system
using snort. International Journal of Computer Applications &
Information Technology, 2012, 1(3): 35–41
73. Feng X, Li Q, Wang H, Sun L. Acquisitional rule-based engine for
discovering Internet-of-Things devices. In: 27th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 18). August 2018, 327–341
74. Bremler-Barr A, Levy H, Yakhini Z. Iot or not: Identifying iot devices
in a short time scale. In: NOMS 2020 - 2020 IEEE /IFIP Network
Operations and Management Symposium. 2020, 1–9
75. Le F, Ortiz J, Verma D, Kandlur D. Policy-based identification of
iot devices’ vendor and type by dns tra ffic analysis. Policy-Based
Autonomic Data Governance, 2019, 180–201
76. Prakash V , Xie S, Huang D Y . Inferring software update practices on
smart home iot devices through user agent analysis. 2022, 93–103
77. Babun L, Aksu H, Ryan L, Akkaya K, Bentley E S, Uluagac A S.
Z-iot: Passive device-class fingerprinting of zigbee and z-wave iot
devices. In: ICC 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC). 2020, 1–7
78. Ma X, Qu J, Li J, Lui J C S, Li Z, Liu W, Guan X. Inferring
hidden iot devices and user interactions via spatial-temporal tra ffic
fingerprinting. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 2022, 30(1):
394–408
79. Kostas K, Just M, Lones M A. Iotdevid: A behavior-based device
identification method for the iot. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
2022, 9(23): 23741–23749
80. Aksu H, Uluagac A S, Bentley E S. Identification of wearable devices
with bluetooth. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing, 2021,
6(2): 221–230
81. Varmarken J, Al Aaraj J, Trimananda R, Markopoulou A. Finger-
printv: Fingerprinting smart tv apps. In: Proceedings on Privacy
Enhancing Technologies (PoPETs). 2022, 606–629
82. Sivanathan A, Sherratt D, Gharakheili H H, Radford A, Wijenayake
C, Vishwanath A, Sivaraman V . Characterizing and classifying iot
traffic in smart cities and campuses. In: 2017 IEEE Conference
30 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS).
2017, 559–564
83. Marchal S, Miettinen M, Nguyen T D, Sadeghi A R, Asokan N. Audi:
Toward autonomous iot device-type identification using periodic
communication. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
2019, 37(6): 1402–1412
84. Guo H, Heidemann J. Ip-based iot device detection. In: Proceedings
of the 2018 Workshop on IoT Security and Privacy. 2018, 36–42
85. Saidi S J, Mandalari A M, Kolcun R, Haddadi H, Dubois D J,
Choffnes D, Smaragdakis G, Feldmann A. A haystack full of needles:
Scalable detection of iot devices in the wild. In: Proceedings of the
ACM Internet Measurement Conference. 2020, 87–100
86. Yu L, Luo B, Ma J, Zhou Z, Liu Q. You are what you broadcast:
Identification of mobile and IoT devices from (public) WiFi. In: 29th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). August 2020,
55–72
87. Dong S, Li Z, Tang D, Chen J, Sun M, Zhang K. Your smart home
can’t keep a secret: Towards automated fingerprinting of iot tra ffic.
In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM Asia Conference on Computer and
Communications Security. 2020, 47–59
88. Maiti R R, Siby S, Sridharan R, Tippenhauer N O. Link-layer device
type classification on encrypted wireless tra ffic with cots radios. In:
Foley S N, Gollmann D, Snekkenes E, eds, Computer Security –
ESORICS 2017. 2017, 247–264
89. Meidan Y , Bohadana M, Shabtai A, Guarnizo J D, Ochoa M,
Tippenhauer N O, Elovici Y . Profiliot: A machine learning approach
for iot device identification based on network tra ffic analysis. In:
Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing. 2017,
506–509
90. Santos M R P, Andrade R M C, Gomes D G, Callado A C. An
efficient approach for device identification and tra ffic classification
in iot ecosystems. In: 2018 IEEE Symposium on Computers and
Communications (ISCC). 2018, 304–309
91. Ortiz J, Crawford C, Le F. Devicemien: Network device behavior
modeling for identifying unknown iot devices. 2019, 106–117
92. Msadek N, Soua R, Engel T. Iot device fingerprinting: Machine
learning based encrypted tra ffic analysis. In: 2019 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC). 2019, 1–8
93. Thangavelu V , Divakaran D M, Sairam R, Bhunia S S, Gurusamy M.
Deft: A distributed iot fingerprinting technique. IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 2019, 6(1): 940–952
94. Guo H, Heidemann J. Detecting iot devices in the internet.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 2020, 28(5): 2323–2336
95. Ammar N, Noirie L, Tixeuil S. Autonomous identification of iot
device types based on a supervised classification. In: ICC 2020 - 2020
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). 2020, 1–6
96. Chakraborty B, Divakaran D M, Nevat I, Peters G W, Gurusamy
M. Cost-aware feature selection for iot device classification. IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, 2021, 8(14): 11052–11064
97. Du R, Wang J, Li S. A lightweight flow feature-based iot device
identification scheme. Security and Communication Networks, 2022,
2022: 1–10
98. Wanode S S, Anand M, Mitra B. Optimal feature set selection
for iot device fingerprinting on edge infrastructure using machine
intelligence. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2022-IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS).
2022, 1–6
99. OConnor T, Mohamed R, Miettinen M, Enck W, Reaves B, Sadeghi
A R. Homesnitch: Behavior transparency and control for smart home
iot devices. In: Proceedings of the 12th conference on security and
privacy in wireless and mobile networks. 2019, 128–138
100. Acar A, Fereidooni H, Abera T, Sikder A K, Miettinen M, Aksu
H, Conti M, Sadeghi A R, Uluagac S. Peek-a-boo: I see your
smart home activities, even encrypted! In: Proceedings of the 13th
ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile
Networks. 2020, 207–218
101. Charyyev B, Gunes M H. Iot event classification based on network
traffic. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS). 2020, 854–
859
102. Gu T, Fang Z, Abhishek A, Fu H, Hu P, Mohapatra P. Iotgaze:
Iot security enforcement via wireless context analysis. In: IEEE
INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications.
2020, 884–893
103. Duan C, Zhang S, Yang J, Wang Z, Yang Y , Li J. Pinball:
Universal and robust signature extraction for smart home devices.
In: 2021 IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on Integrated Network
Management (IM). 2021, 1–9
104. Wan Y , Xu K, Wang F, Xue G. Iotathena: Unveiling iot device
activities from network tra ffic. IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, 2021, 21(1): 651–664
105. Shafqat N, Dubois D J, Cho ffnes D, Schulman A, Bharadia D,
Ranganathan A. Zleaks: Passive inference attacks on zigbee based
smart homes. In: International Conference on Applied Cryptography
and Network Security. 2022, 105–125
106. Ahmed D, Sabir A, Das A. Spying through your voice assistants:
Realistic voice command fingerprinting. In: 32nd USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 23). August 2023, 2419–2436
107. Apthorpe N, Reisman D, Sundaresan S, Narayanan A, Feamster N.
Spying on the smart home: Privacy attacks and defenses on encrypted
iot traffic. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.05044, 2017
108. Apthorpe N, Reisman D, Feamster N. A smart home is no castle:
Privacy vulnerabilities of encrypted iot tra ffic. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.06805, 2017
109. Singh A D, Garcia L, Noor J, Srivastava M. I always feel like
somebody’s sensing me! a framework to detect, identify, and localize
clandestine wireless sensors. In: 30th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 21). August 2021, 1829–1846
110. Li H, He Y , Sun L, Cheng X, Yu J. Side-channel information leakage
of encrypted video stream in video surveillance systems. In: IEEE
INFOCOM 2016-The 35th Annual IEEE International Conference on
Computer Communications. 2016, 1–9
111. Cheng Y , Ji X, Lu T, Xu W. Dewicam: Detecting hidden wireless
cameras via smartphones. In: Proceedings of the 2018 on Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 2018, 1–13
112. Wu K, Lagesse B. Do you see what i see? detecting hidden
streaming cameras through similarity of simultaneous observation.
In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications (PerCom. 2019, 1–10
113. Singh A D, Garcia L, Noor J, Srivastava M. I always feel like
somebody’s sensing me! a framework to detect, identify, and localize
clandestine wireless sensors. In: 30th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 21). 2021, 1829–1846
114. Sharma R A, Soltanaghaei E, Rowe A, Sekar V . Lumos: Identifying
and localizing diverse hidden {IoT} devices in an unfamiliar
environment. In: 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 22). 2022, 1095–1112
115. Shi L, Bahl P, Katabi D. Beyond sensing: {Multi-GHz}realtime
spectrum analytics. In: 12th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 15). 2015, 159–172
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 31
116. Felten E W, Schneider M A. Timing attacks on web privacy.
In: Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security. 2000, 25–32
117. Conti M, Mancini L V , Spolaor R, Verde N V . Analyzing android
encrypted network traffic to identify user actions. IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, 2015, 11(1): 114–125
118. Hasara Pathmaperuma M, Rahulamathavan Y , Dogan S, M. Kondoz
A. User mobile app encrypted activity detection. In: The 2nd
European Symposium on Computer and Communications. 2021, 7–
13
119. Wan Y , Xu K, Wang F, Xue G. Iotmosaic: Inferring user activities
from iot network traffic in smart homes. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2022-
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. 2022, 370–379
120. Gu T, Fang Z, Abhishek A, Mohapatra P. Iotspy: Uncovering human
privacy leakage in iot networks via mining wireless context. In: 2020
IEEE 31st Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and
Mobile Radio Communications. 2020, 1–7
121. Subahi A, Theodorakopoulos G. Detecting iot user behavior and
sensitive information in encrypted iot-app tra ffic. Sensors, 2019,
19(21): 4777
122. Chu G, Apthorpe N, Feamster N. Security and privacy analyses of
internet of things children’s toys. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
2018, 6(1): 978–985
123. Schmidt D, Tagliaro C, Borgolte K, Lindorfer M. Iotflow: Inferring
iot device behavior at scale through static mobile companion app
analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security. 2023, 681–695
124. Babun L, Celik Z B, McDaniel P, Uluagac A S. Real-time analysis of
privacy-(un) aware iot applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10461,
2019
125. Heartfield R, Loukas G, Bezemskij A, Panaousis E. Self-
configurable cyber-physical intrusion detection for smart homes using
reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics
and Security, 2020, 16: 1720–1735
126. Anthi E, Williams L, Słowi ´nska M, Theodorakopoulos G, Burnap P.
A supervised intrusion detection system for smart home iot devices.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2019, 6(5): 9042–9053
127. Wan Y , Xu K, Xue G, Wang F. Iotargos: A multi-layer security
monitoring system for internet-of-things in smart homes. In: IEEE
INFOCOM 2020 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications.
2020, 874–883
128. Pathak A K, Saguna S, Mitra K, Åhlund C. Anomaly detection using
machine learning to discover sensor tampering in iot systems. In: ICC
2021 - IEEE International Conference on Communications. 2021, 1–
6
129. Tekiner E, Acar A, Uluagac A S. A lightweight iot cryptojacking
detection mechanism in heterogeneous smart home networks. In:
Proc. of the ISOC Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium (NDSS). 2022
130. Zhang W, Meng Y , Liu Y , Zhang X, Zhang Y , Zhu H. Homonit: Mon-
itoring smart home apps from encrypted traffic. In: Proceedings of the
2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security. 2018, 1074–1088
131. Charyyev B, Gunes M H. Detecting anomalous iot tra ffic flow with
locality sensitive hashes. In: GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE Global
Communications Conference. 2020, 1–6
132. Wu J, Nan Y , Kumar V , Payer M, Xu D. BlueShield: Detecting
spoofing attacks in bluetooth low energy networks. In: 23rd
International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and
Defenses (RAID 2020). October 2020, 397–411
133. Prasad R, Rohokale V , Prasad R, Rohokale V . Cyber threats and
attack overview. Cyber Security: The Lifeline of Information and
Communication Technology, 2020, 15–31
134. Reed A, Dooley L S, Mostefaoui S K. A reliable real-time slow dos
detection framework for resource-constrained iot networks. In: 2021
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). 2021, 1–
6
135. Baby R, Pooranian Z, Shojafar M, Tafazolli R. A heterogenous iot
attack detection through deep reinforcement learning: A dynamic
ml approach. In: ICC 2023 - IEEE International Conference on
Communications. 2023, 479–484
136. Nguyen T D, Marchal S, Miettinen M, Fereidooni H, Asokan N,
Sadeghi A R. D ¨ıot: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
system for iot. In: 2019 IEEE 39th International conference on
distributed computing systems (ICDCS). 2019, 756–767
137. Popoola S I, Ande R, Adebisi B, Gui G, Hammoudeh M, Jogunola
O. Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack detection in
iot-edge devices. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2022, 9(5): 3930–
3944
138. Nishio T, Nakahara M, Okui N, Kubota A, Kobayashi Y , Sugiyama
K, Shinkuma R. Anomaly tra ffic detection with federated learning
toward network-based malware detection in iot. In: GLOBECOM
2022 - 2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference. 2022, 299–
304
139. Zhao R, Yang L, Wang Y , Xue Z, Gui G, Ohtsuki T. A semi-
supervised federated learning scheme via knowledge distillation for
intrusion detection. In: ICC 2022 - IEEE International Conference on
Communications. 2022, 2688–2693
140. Zhang J, Liang S, Ye F, Hu R Q, Qian Y . Towards detection of zero-
day botnet attack in iot networks using federated learning. In: ICC
2023-IEEE International Conference on Communications. 2023, 7–
12
141. Hwang R H, Peng M C, Huang C W. Detecting iot malicious tra ffic
based on autoencoder and convolutional neural network. In: 2019
IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps). 2019, 1–6
142. Kim J, Sim A, Kim J, Wu K. Botnet detection using recurrent
variational autoencoder. In: GLOBECOM 2020 - 2020 IEEE Global
Communications Conference. 2020, 1–6
143. Bovenzi G, Aceto G, Ciuonzo D, Persico V , Pescap ´e A. A
hierarchical hybrid intrusion detection approach in iot scenarios. In:
GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE global communications conference.
2020, 1–7
144. Zixu T, Liyanage K S K, Gurusamy M. Generative adversarial
network and auto encoder based anomaly detection in distributed
iot networks. In: GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE Global
Communications Conference. 2020, 1–7
145. Popoola S I, Adebisi B, Hammoudeh M, Gui G, Gacanin H. Hybrid
deep learning for botnet attack detection in the internet-of-things
networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020, 8(6): 4944–4956
146. Nakip M, Gelenbe E. Mirai botnet attack detection with auto-
associative dense random neural network. In: 2021 IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). 2021, 1–6
147. Dinh P V , Uy N Q, Nguyen D N, Hoang D T, Bao S P, Dutkiewicz
E. Twin variational auto-encoder for representation learning in iot
intrusion detection. In: 2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC). 2022, 848–853
148. Luo Y , Chen X, Ge N, Feng W, Lu J. Transformer-based malicious
traffic detection for internet of things. In: ICC 2022 - IEEE
International Conference on Communications. 2022, 4187–4192
149. Elghalhoud O, Naik K, Zaman M, S R M. Data balancing and cnn
32 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
based network intrusion detection system. In: 2023 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC). 2023, 1–6
150. Hasan N, Chen Z, Zhao C, Zhu Y , Liu C. Iot botnet detection
framework from network behavior based on extreme learning
machine. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS). 2022, 1–6
151. Illy P, Kaddoum G, Moreira C M, Kaur K, Garg S. Securing
fog-to-things environment using intrusion detection system based on
ensemble learning. In: 2019 IEEE wireless communications and
networking conference (WCNC). 2019, 1–7
152. Dwyer O P, Marnerides A K, Giotsas V , Mursch T. Profiling iot-
based botnet traffic using dns. In: 2019 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM). 2019, 1–6
153. Hafeez I, Antikainen M, Ding A Y , Tarkoma S. Iot-keeper: Detecting
malicious iot network activity using online tra ffic analysis at the
edge. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 2020,
17(1): 45–59
154. OKUR C, DENER M. Detecting iot botnet attacks using machine
learning methods. In: 2020 International Conference on Information
Security and Cryptology (ISCTURKEY). 2020, 31–37
155. Wang H, Mu ˜noz-Gonz´alez L, Eklund D, Raza S. Non-iid data re-
balancing at iot edge with peer-to-peer federated learning for anomaly
detection. In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on Security
and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks. 2021, 153–163
156. Doshi K, Yilmaz Y , Uludag S. Timely detection and mitigation
of stealthy ddos attacks via iot networks. IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing, 2021, 18(5): 2164–2176
157. Shafiq M, Tian Z, Bashir A K, Du X, Guizani M. Corrauc:
A malicious bot-iot tra ffic detection method in iot network using
machine-learning techniques. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021,
8(5): 3242–3254
158. Zhou K, Lin X, Wu J, Bashir A K, Li J, Imran M. Metric learning-
based few-shot malicious node detection for iot backhaul /fronthaul
networks. In: GLOBECOM 2022-2022 IEEE Global Communica-
tions Conference. 2022, 5777–5782
159. Torabi S, Bou-Harb E, Assi C, Karbab E B, Boukhtouta A,
Debbabi M. Inferring and investigating iot-generated scanning
campaigns targeting a large network telescope. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2022, 19(1): 402–418
160. Antonakakis M, April T, Bailey M, Bernhard M, Bursztein E,
Cochran J, Durumeric Z, Halderman J A, Invernizzi L, Kallitsis M,
others . Understanding the mirai botnet. In: 26th USENIX security
symposium (USENIX Security 17). 2017, 1093–1110
161. Pineda D, Harrilal-Parchment R, Akkaya K, Perez-Pons A. Sdn-
based gtp-u tra ffic analysis for 5g networks. In: NOMS 2023-2023
IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium. 2023,
1–4
162. Kumar D, Shen K, Case B, Garg D, Alperovich G, Kuznetsov D,
Gupta R, Durumeric Z. All things considered: An analysis of iot
devices on home networks. In: 28th USENIX security symposium
(USENIX Security 19). 2019, 1169–1185
163. Paracha M T, Dubois D J, Vallina-Rodriguez N, Cho ffnes D. Iotls:
understanding tls usage in consumer iot devices. In: Proceedings of
the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference. 2021, 165–178
164. Saidi S J, Matic S, Gasser O, Smaragdakis G, Feldmann A. Deep
dive into the iot backend ecosystem. In: Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM internet measurement conference. 2022, 488–503
165. Tagliaro C, Komsic M, Continella A, Borgolte K, Lindorfer M. Large-
scale security analysis of real-world backend deployments speaking
iot-focused protocols. In: Proceedings of the 27th International
Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses. 2024,
561–578
166. Noroozian A, Rodriguez E T, Lastdrager E, Kasama T, Van Eeten
M, Ga ˜n´an C H. Can isps help mitigate iot malware? a longitudinal
study of broadband isp security e fforts. In: 2021 IEEE European
Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). 2021, 337–352
167. Almazarqi H A, Woodyard M, Mursch T, Pezaros D, Marnerides A K.
Macroscopic analysis of iot botnets. In: GLOBECOM 2022-2022
IEEE Global Communications Conference. 2022, 2674–2679
168. Herwig S, Harvey K, Hughey G, Roberts R, Levin D. Measurement
and analysis of hajime, a peer-to-peer iot botnet. In: Network and
Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium. 2019
169. Dubois D J, Kolcun R, Mandalari A M, Paracha M T, Cho ffnes
D, Haddadi H. When Speakers Are All Ears: Characterizing
Misactivations of IoT Smart Speakers. In: Proc. of the Privacy
Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS). 2020
170. Li J, Li Z, Tyson G, Xie G. Your privilege gives your privacy away:
An analysis of a home security camera service. In: IEEE INFOCOM
2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. 2020, 387–
396
171. Mandalari A M, Dubois D J, Kolcun R, Paracha M T, Haddadi
H, Cho ffnes D. Blocking without Breaking: Identification and
Mitigation of Non-Essential IoT Tra ffic. In: Proc. of the Privacy
Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS). 2021
172. Kowalcyzk M, Gunawan J, Cho ffnes D, Dubois D, Hartzog W,
Wilson C. Understanding Dark Patterns in Home IoT Devices. In:
Proceedings of ACM Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
2023). April 2023
173. Mandalari A M, Haddadi H, Dubois D J, Cho ffnes D. Protected or
Porous: A Comparative Analysis of Threat Detection Capability of
IoT Safeguards. In: Proc. of the 44th IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (Oakland 2023). 2023
174. Shenoi A, Vairam P K, Sabharwal K, Li J, Divakaran D M. ipet: Pri-
vacy enhancing tra ffic perturbations for secure iot communications.
Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol., 2023, 2023: 206–220
175. Apthorpe N, Huang D Y , Reisman D, Narayanan A, Feamster N.
Keeping the smart home private with smart (er) iot tra ffic shaping.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00955, 2018
176. Shmatikov V , Wang M H. Timing analysis in low-latency mix
networks: Attacks and defenses. In: Computer Security–ESORICS
2006: 11th European Symposium on Research in Computer Security,
Hamburg, Germany, September 18-20, 2006. Proceedings 11. 2006,
18–33
177. Brahma J, Sadhya D. Preserving contextual privacy for smart home
iot devices with dynamic tra ffic shaping. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2021, 9(13): 11434–11441
178. Hou T, Wang T, Lu Z, Liu Y , Sagduyu Y . Iotgan: Gan powered
camouflage against machine learning based iot device identification.
In: 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum
Access Networks (DySPAN). 2021, 280–287
179. Tan S, Yu S, Liu W, He D, Chan S. You can glimpse but you
cannot identify: Protect iot devices from being fingerprinted. IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2023
180. Han D, Wang Z, Zhong Y , Chen W, Yang J, Lu S, Shi X, Yin
X. Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of machine
learning-based network intrusion detectors. IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, 2021, 39(8): 2632–2647
181. Qiu H, Dong T, Zhang T, Lu J, Memmi G, Qiu M. Adversarial attacks
against network intrusion detection in iot systems. IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 2020, 8(13): 10327–10335
Yan Jia et al. Analyzing Consumer IoT Traffic from Security and Privacy Perspectives: a Comprehensive Survey 33
182. Liu J, Zhang C, Fang Y . Epic: A di fferential privacy framework to
defend smart homes against internet traffic analysis. IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 2018, 5(2): 1206–1217
183. Duan C, Wang K, Chen W, Song G, Yang J, Wang Z. Monitoring
smart home traffic under differential privacy. In: NOMS 2022-2022
IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium. 2022,
1–10
184. Xiong S, Sarwate A D, Mandayam N B. Network tra ffic shaping
for enhancing privacy in iot systems. IEEE /ACM Transactions on
Networking, 2022, 30(3): 1162–1177
185. Alomari E, Manickam S, Gupta B, Singh P, Anbar M. Design,
deployment and use of http-based botnet (hbb) testbed. In: 16th
International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology.
2014, 1265–1269
186. Lee C, Abe H, Hirotsu T, Umemura K. Tra ffic anomaly analysis
and characteristics on a virtualized network testbed. IEICE
TRANSACTIONS on Information and Systems, 2011, 94(12): 2353–
2361
187. Catillo M, Pecchia A, Villano U. Machine learning on public
intrusion datasets: Academic hype or concrete advances in nids?
In: 2023 53rd Annual IEEE /IFIP International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks-Supplemental V olume (DSN-S).
2023, 132–136
188. Xie R, Wang Y , Cao J, Dong E, Xu M, Sun K, Li Q, Shen L, Zhang
M. Rosetta: Enabling robust tls encrypted tra ffic classification in
diverse network environments with tcp-aware tra ffic augmentation.
In: Proceedings of the ACM Turing Award Celebration Conference-
China 2023. 2023, 131–132
189. Bronzino F, Schmitt P, Ayoubi S, Kim H, Teixeira R, Feamster N.
Traffic refinery: Cost-aware data representation for machine learning
on network tra ffic. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and
Analysis of Computing Systems, 2021, 5(3): 1–24
190. Zola F, Segurola-Gil L, Bruse J L, Galar M, Orduna-Urrutia
R. Network tra ffic analysis through node behaviour classification:
a graph-based approach with temporal dissection and data-level
preprocessing. Computers & Security, 2022, 115: 102632
191. Holland J, Schmitt P, Feamster N, Mittal P. New directions in
automated traffic analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 2021, 3366–
3383
192. Kaddour J, Harris J, Mozes M, Bradley H, Raileanu R, McHardy R.
Challenges and applications of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.10169, 2023
193. Sarabi A, Yin T, Liu M. An llm-based framework for fingerprinting
internet-connected devices. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM on
Internet Measurement Conference. 2023, 478–484
194. Habib M A, Rivera P E I, Ozcan Y , Elsayed M, Bavand M, Gaigalas
R, Erol-Kantarci M. Llm-based intent processing and network op-
timization using attention-based hierarchical reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06059, 2024
195. Guastalla M, Li Y , Hekmati A, Krishnamachari B. Application of
large language models to ddos attack detection. In: International
Conference on Security and Privacy in Cyber-Physical Systems and
Smart Vehicles. 2023, 83–99
196. Hassanin M, Keshk M, Salim S, Alsubaie M, Sharma D. Pllm-cs:
Pre-trained large language model (llm) for cyber threat detection in
satellite networks. Ad Hoc Networks, 2025, 166: 103645
197. Qiao C, Li M, Liu Y , Tian Z. Transitioning from federated learning to
quantum federated learning in internet of things: A comprehensive
survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2025, 27(1):
509–545
198. Qiao C, Brown K N, Zhang F, Tian Z. Adaptive asynchronous
clustering algorithms for wireless mesh networks. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2023, 35(3): 2610–2627
199. Zhao B, Ji S, Xu J, Tian Y , Wei Q, Wang Q, Lyu C, Zhang X,
Lin C, Wu J, others . A large-scale empirical analysis of the
vulnerabilities introduced by third-party components in iot firmware.
In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis. 2022, 442–454
200. Nan Y , Wang X, Xing L, Liao X, Wu R, Wu J, Zhang Y , Wang X.
Are you spying on me? Large-Scale analysis on IoT data exposure
through companion apps. In: 32nd USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 23). August 2023, 6665–6682
201. Chen J, Diao W, Zhao Q, Zuo C, Lin Z, Wang X, Lau W C, Sun M,
Yang R, Zhang K. Iotfuzzer: Discovering memory corruptions in iot
through app-based fuzzing. In: NDSS. 2018
202. Cobb C, Surbatovich M, Kawakami A, Sharif M, Bauer L, Das A, Jia
L. How risky are real users’ ifttt applets? In: Sixteenth Symposium
on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2020). 2020, 505–529
203. Bastys I, Balliu M, Sabelfeld A. If this then what? controlling flows
in iot apps. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security. 2018, 1102–1119
204. Jia Y , Xiao Y , Yu J, Cheng X, Liang Z, Wan Z. A novel graph-
based mechanism for identifying traffic vulnerabilities in smart home
iot. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2018 - IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications. 2018, 1493–1501
205. Peng C, Fan W, Huang W, Zhu D. A novel approach based
on improved naive bayes for 5g air interface ddos detection. In:
2023 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC). 2023, 1–6
206. Arefin S, Chowdhury M, Parvez R, Ahmed T, Abrar A S, Sumaiya
F. Understanding apt detection using machine learning algorithms: Is
superior accuracy a thing? In: 2024 IEEE International Conference
on Electro Information Technology (eIT). 2024, 532–537
207. Chen J, Lan X, Zhang Q, Ma W, Fang W, He J. Defending against apt
attacks in cloud computing environments using grouped multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2025,
1–1
Yan Jia is an Associate Professor at
Nankai University in Tianjin, China.
He received the B.S. and Ph.D. degree
from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2015 and 2020 respectively. His
research interests include IoT security
and privacy, vulnerability mining, Web
security, usable security and privacy, network and system security,
etc. He published several papers in top security conferences, such
as IEEE S&P, USENIX Security, ACM CCS and NDSS. His work
helped many high-profile vendors improve their products’ security,
including Amazon, Microsoft, Apple, and Google.
34 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–34
Yuxin Songis now working toward the
master’s degree in Computer Technology
at the College of Cryptology and Cy-
ber Science, Nankai University, Tianjin,
China. Her research interests mainly
include IoT security, IoT privacy, and
traffic analysis technology.
Zihou Liu received the B.E. degree in
Internet of Things Engineering from the
Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in
June 2022. He is currently pursuing
the Master’s degree with the College of
Computer Science, Nankai University,
Tianjin. His research interests include
Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence security, IoT security, and
cyberspace security situational awareness.
Qingyin Tan received the B.E. degree
in information security from the Nankai
University, Tianjin, China, in June 2020.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the College of Cryptology and Cyber
Science, Nankai University, Tianjin. His
main research interests include Web
application security, system security, and
IoT security.
Yang Song, an associate researcher at
Hangzhou Dianzi University, holds a
doctorate from the University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences. He was formerly
the Chief Scientist of Instruction Set In-
telligence Technology Co., Ltd., and once
served as a researcher at the Innovation
Institute of Shanda Group and a senior technical expert at Alibaba
Group. His main research directions include artificial intelligence,
operating systems, etc.
Yu Zhang received the B.E. degree in
computer science and the Ph.D. degree
in computer system architecture from the
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin,
China, in 2004 and 2010, respectively.
After graduation, he joined the College of Computer and Control
Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. He is currently
an Associate Professor with the College of Cyber Science, Nankai
University. He has authored or coauthored more than 30
academic papers in international conferences and journals. His
research interests include machine learning, data mining, artificial
intelligence security and network security, particularly cyberspace
security situational awareness.
Zheli Liu received the BSc and MSc
degrees in computer science from Jilin
University, China, in 2002 and 2005,
respectively. He received the PhD
degree in computer application from Jilin
University in 2009. After a postdoc-
toral fellowship in Nankai University, he
joined the College of Computer and Control Engineering of Nankai
University in 2011. Currently, he works at Nankai University
as a Professor. His current research interests include applied
cryptography and data privacy protection.