BLOCKCHAIN -BASED DECENTRALIZED KNOWLEDGE
MARKETPLACE USING ACTIVE INFERENCE
Shashank Joshi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
SRM Institute Of Science And Technology
Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu – 603203,
sj8559@srmist.edu.in
Arhan Choudhury
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
SRM Institute Of Science And Technology
Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu – 603203,
ac8365@srmist.edu.in
ABSTRACT
A knowledge market can be described as a type of market where there is a consistent
supply of data to satisfy the demand for information and is responsible for the map-
ping of potential problem solvers with the entities which need these solutions. It is
possible to deﬁne them as value-exchange systems in which the dynamic features of
the creation and exchange of intellectual assets serve as the fundamental drivers of the
frequency, nature, and outcomes of interactions among various stakeholders. Further-
more, the provision of ﬁnancial backing for research is an essential component in the
process of developing a knowledge market that is capable of enduring over time, and
it is also an essential driver of the progression of scientiﬁc investigation. This paper
underlines ﬂaws associated with the conventional knowledge-based market, including
but not limited to excessive ﬁnancing concentration, ineffective information exchange,
a lack of security, mapping of entities, etc. The authors present a decentralized frame-
work for the knowledge marketplace incorporating technologies such as blockchain,
active inference, zero-knowledge proof, etc. The proposed decentralized framework
provides not only an efﬁcient mapping mechanism to map entities in the marketplace
but also a more secure and controlled way to share knowledge and services among
various stakeholders.
Keywords DAO ·Blockchain ·Knowledge ·Marketplace ·Active Inference ·Decentralization ·Free Energy
1 Introduction
To be successful in today’s extremely competitive and knowledge-based economy, businesses need to be able to
handle huge amounts of information and services effectively. This kind of information and service is extremely
sophisticated, not to mention that it is incredibly diverse, and it is expanding at an ever-increasing rate. Over
the course of time, different knowledge management strategies have emerged [1], and It is apparent that the
preponderance of the studies and developments have been concentrated on the management of knowledge
within organizations, which is where a large number of issues have been resolved [2]. Nevertheless, this opens
up a window of opportunity for organizations or individuals to economically utilize their knowledge assets
arXiv:2210.01688v1  [cs.CR]  4 Oct 2022
[3], and the phenomena of utilizing the crowd’s knowledge assets against commercialization give rise to the
concept of knowledge markets. Nevertheless, the existing knowledge monetizing ecosystem is inefﬁcient and
thus undermines the productivity of the whole knowledge-sharing sector due to its inherent structural and
operational intricacies.
To begin with, research funding is a crucial facet of a sustaining knowledge marketplace, and the structure of
the current knowledge market is inherently characterized by the disparity in research spending [4]. Furthermore,
one of the main causes of this discrepancy is an improper mapping of the parties who would be interested in
a research consignment (which usually culminates in the interchange and commercialization of knowledge
assets). In addition, the fact that prominent players are involved in this sector is another factor that adds to
the problem of excessive funding concentration [5]. Next, the conventional knowledge market framework
is also cluttered with a plethora of intricacies, which, in turn, leads to inefﬁcient information ﬂow between
the stakeholders. Lastly, other problems associated with the conventional knowledge trade include a lack of
information security, privacy, access control, ownership transfer, and transparency.
In order to resolve the aforementioned issues and to streamline the exchange of knowledge assets, this paper
proposes a novel decentralized framework in order to construct a trustworthy and functional knowledge
marketplace, which employs active inference-based free energy analysis for the efﬁcient mapping of the
stakeholders for a research contract along with blockchain’s innate qualities including but not limited to
immutability, secure, distributed, fraud resilience etc. which based on its cutting-edge data cryptographic
techniques, assures both the security of the data as well as the user’s identiﬁcation. To avoid the issues of a
centralized framework in which all information and knowledge is held by a limited number of parties, the
proposed framework makes use of current advancements in computing technology to establish a ﬂexible and
distributed network. To facilitate each party’s contribution, the framework allows for not only the sharing of
information but also the trading of expertise and services.
The paper addresses four foundational facets of the knowledge marketplace. First, it veriﬁes and assesses
whether or not the researchers and the investors are a good ﬁt for one another. Second, the proposed framework
guarantees equitable monetization, meaning that both the investor and the knowledge seller should beneﬁt from
the knowledge monetization, and the knowledge buyer should obtain the knowledge after payment has been
received. Third, ensure that the information is not divulged to any other parties until the process of knowledge
monetization has been fully completed, thus ensuring the conﬁdentiality of intellectual assets. Finally, the
proposed architecture also streamlines all the interactions and processes among various stakeholders of the
network.
The remaining sections of this paper are structured as follows: Section 2 provides some context or preliminary
information on this work. Next, Section 3 provides a summary of the current attempts to digitize the
knowledge economy, including a review of the relevant research and associated works. The working of
the knowledge marketplace is outlined in section 4. Section 5 of the paper then describes the conventional
knowledge exchange system along with its ﬂaws. Then, Section 6 elaborates on the proposed framework for
the knowledge marketplace and its potential outcome on the knowledge monetization sector. Finally, The
paper is concluded in section 7, along with some recommendations for further research.
2 Background
2.1 Blockchain
A decentralized distributed ledger that can only be appended to and has a synchronization mechanism
constitutes a blockchain network. It logs every transaction and veriﬁes the origin of any assets involved
in those transactions in chronological order using cryptographic links between each block. Blockchain
technology, in contrast to centralized apps found on the internet, does not have a single controlling authority.
The distributed ledger system (blockchain) consists of a network of nodes, each of which copies the ledger. It
is seen in a public capacity by every user that is connected to the network [6]. Because only the wallet address
may be matched to a transaction, all of the transactions are open to public scrutiny while maintaining a veneer
of anonymity [7]. The ﬁrst practical implementation of blockchain technology was the "cryptocurrency"
2
Figure 1: Architecture Of Blockchain Network
Bitcoin [8], which is also known as a "decentralized digital currency" that is veriﬁed by encryption. After that,
a plethora of brand-new currencies, each with their own set of distinctive characteristics, such as Ethereum [9],
emerged. The basic architecture of a blockchain network is illustrated in Figure 1.
2.2 Active Inference
Active inference is a theory that describes perception, planning, and action in terms of probabilistic inference.
It is a way of describing sentient activity [10]. Active inference, which theoretical neuroscientist Karl Friston
created during years of ground-breaking research, offers an integrated viewpoint on the brain, cognition, and
behaviour that is increasingly employed in various ﬁelds, including neuroscience, psychology, and philosophy.
Active inference translates observation into action. Active inference’s theory, applications, and cognitive
domains simulate various complex systems.
By framing behaviour and the brain in terms of a single drive to reduce free energy, active inference is a
"ﬁrst principles" approach to understanding behaviour and the brain. In order to comprehend how the brain
functions, there is a strong emphasis on the implications of the free energy principle. In order to contextualize
active inference within the most recent theories of cognition, it is ﬁrst introduced theoretically and formally. It
3
then offers concrete illustrations of computer models that employ active inference to describe many aspects of
cognition, including perception, attention, memory, and planning.
According to Active Inference, the brain approximates the best possible probabilistic (Bayesian) belief updating
in the perceptual, cognitive, and motor domains. More speciﬁcally, Active Inference holds that the brain has a
"generative" internal model of the world that can mimic the sensory input it should experience if its model of
the world is accurate. The differences between predicted and observed sensations can be used to update the
model by comparing the simulated (predicted) sensory data against actual observations.
This updating corresponds to inference (perception) over short durations (like a single observation), whereas it
corresponds to learning over longer timescales (i.e., updating expectations about what will be observed later)
[11]. Another way to say it is that learning optimizes ideas about the connections between the variables that
make up the universe, whereas perception optimizes beliefs about the world as it is now. These procedures can
be thought of as ensuring that the generative model, which the brain generates due to its recognition processes,
accurately represents the outside world [12].
2.3 Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO)
A decentralized autonomous organization, also known as a DAO, is a blockchain-based system that enables
people to coordinate and self-govern themselves using a set of self-executing rules that are deployed on a
public blockchain [13]. DAOs have decentralized governance and are independent of central control. DAOs
work in a manner analogous to organizations that mediate interactions between a group of individuals, often
an open community that recruits new members. Members of certain decentralized autonomous organizations
(DAOs) function analogously to stockholders in traditional businesses in that they possess a particular token
that enables participation in the DAO.
DAOs are considered to be autonomous because, unless their code speciﬁes expressly otherwise, they operate
independently from the developers who created them. The organization’s activities, which are governed by
its members (humans), are compliant with the standards established in its code. Additionally, due to the fact
that they are deployed on a public blockchain, they are resistant to censorship. This is because there is no
centralized authority that has the ability to shut down the DAO and the service that it provides. DAOs will
therefore continue to function, for example, by providing services, buying and selling resources, or hiring
people, so long as there are members willing to execute their code [14]. This might mean that DAOs continue
to give services, buy and sell resources, or hire people.
2.4 Smart Contract
Smart contracts facilitate, carry out, and enforce agreements between unreliable parties [15]. This is because
smart contracts do not require the support of a trustworthy third party. They function atop the blockchain
network and make it possible to digitize contracts that were previously only available on paper. Solidity,
which is a Turing-complete language, is the language that is used for the generation of smart contracts on the
Ethereum network. They offer many of the same functionalities that are available in centralized services. Once
they have been implemented, smart contracts become immutable and are kept on every node of the blockchain
network. This makes them resistant to manipulation since they cannot be altered. Some smart contracts have
an upgrade capability, which allows the contract to be upgraded after it has been deployed [16]. They enable
the execution of a collection of commands along with access control, which helps to decrease the possibility
of human negligence.
3 Related Works
3.1 Creation And Transmission of Knowledge
Creating new knowledge assets entails coming up with novel practical outcomes like new ideas, products,
or concepts. Knowledge is developed via experience, communication, and instruction, wherein many forms
4
of information are integrated and transformed [17]. Esterhuizen et al.[18] state that the process of creating
new information has two aspects. According to their explanation, knowledge generation is viewed in a binary
fashion by the ﬁrst dimension. By this account, new bits of information are just like any other asset for an
organization; they can be quantiﬁed and evaluated, and their value can rise and fall in response to changes
in the external environment. The second point of view is the process dimension, which sees the process of
knowledge generation as one that is not static but rather dynamic, interactive, process-oriented, and focused on
relationships. Knowledge, according to Nonaka et al.[19], is formed through four processes: socialization,
externalization, combination, and internalization. Finally, the authors conclude that the most productive
environments for knowledge creation are those that encourage not just the process of innovation but also
their evaluation and selection for use in resolving organizational challenges and capitalizing on economic
possibilities.
The term "knowledge diffusion" was used by Appleyard et al. [20] to describe the transmission and sharing
of information and expertise between businesses. According to the authors, this spreading of information
and ideas can take place through personal and professional networks. In [ 21], Wojick et al. emphasize the
signiﬁcance of the widespread transmission and utilization of information as a critical component in the
growth of civil society. Knowledge transmission, as deﬁned by Chen et al. [ 22], is the incorporation of
previously acquired information into many ﬁelds of scientiﬁc and technical inquiry and advancement. Cohen
et al. [23] describe that the identiﬁcation, accumulation of value, assimilation, transformation, and exploitation
of knowledge resources to facilitate learning are all critical factors in the spread of information. In the context
of this research, knowledge transmission refers to the process by which information is disseminated from its
original point of origin to a wider audience by any means, including but not limited to word of mouth, formal
education systems, and electronic media.
3.2 Adoption of Blockchain Technology With Knowledge Marketplace
The integration of blockchain technology and knowledge monetization results in a framework that is both
more secure and easier to regulate when it comes to the exchange of information and services. This enables
the company to develop a business model that is both scalable and ﬂexible at a lower cost, which, in turn, leads
to an improvement in the overall quality, reliability, and efﬁcacy of research services. Cai et al. [24] propose a
novel, fully-ﬂedged architecture for developing a trustworthy marketplace for knowledge based on streams
of data gathered via crowdsourcing. Safe monetization of trustworthy insights gleaned in private from data
streams for use in crowdsensing applications is supported by the proposed market architecture. This research
makes use of lightweight cryptographic approaches to provide the ﬁrst streaming truth discovery architecture
for mining trustworthy information, and then it skillfully employs the blockchain to back up this monetization
of knowledge while providing full security and service assurances.
In [25], Li et al. propose a framework for the cross-enterprise exchange of information and services in order to
facilitate collaboration among manufacturers. The authors propose a distributed architecture for information
and service sharing across manufacturing ecosystem participants, utilizing blockchain and edge computing
as the enabling technologies. To avoid the issues of a centralized framework in which all information and
knowledge are held by a limited number of parties, this one makes use of cutting-edge computing technology
to create a ﬂexible and dispersed network. The framework facilitates not just the sharing of information,
but also the trading of expertise and services, allowing those involved to do their part. Standardization and
protocols for its implementation are provided by blockchain technology, which also guarantees security and
identity concerns thanks to the use of sophisticated data cryptographic algorithms.
4 Operational Model of Knowledge Marketplace
In this section of the paper, the operational model of the knowledge monetization framework is investigated,
along with its relevance in the overall process of information sharing. The functional model of The Knowledge
Market is capable of being partitioned into a number of separate stages, which are enumerated in the following
order:
5
Figure 2: Operational Structure Associated Knowledge Marketplace
• Knowledge Phase: Providing market players with essential information about the items and services
that are being offered is the primary focus of the knowledge phase. This information might be
provided through a diverse method including but not limited to computerized marketing collaterals,
services, or facilitators. When working with complicated goods like knowledge assets, the only way
to ensure that the outputs of the knowledge phase will be satisfactory is to reach a consensus on
the logical space. This consensus can take the shape of, for instance, a standardized lexicon with
agreed-upon semantics.
• Desideratum Phase: During the desideratum phase, the market agent formulates speciﬁc plans to
trade commodities and services with other parties. The end product has clear speciﬁcations for both
the requests and the offerings. The computerized marketing collateral is the principal media that is
used to make offers public to potential customers. The description of the offers has to be speciﬁc
enough so that it may serve as a sufﬁcient foundation for signing a contract.
• Contracting Phase: In the contracting phase, parties engage in negotiations, the successful conclu-
sion of which is memorialized in a legally binding and cryptographically secure electronic contract.
The results-oriented desideratum phase forms the basis of these contracts.
• Settlement Phase: The settlement phase necessitates services associated with ﬁnalizing the terms
of the electronic contract ﬁnalized in the previous phase. Services such as monetization terms,
knowledge ownership, information transfer, shipping, and insurance are all included here.
5 Conventional Knowledge Exchange System
Existing methods of knowledge monetization are typically complex and have not undergone signiﬁcant
development in a very long time. Traditionally, the commercialization and exchange of knowledge takes
6
place through the submission of possible research proposals, which then lead to research contracts. The entire
process may be characterized as the following phases:
1. Research project stakeholders [26]: A considerable contribution to the successful completion of a
project is made by its stakeholders [27]. The following is a rundown of the numerous procedures that
are involved in this phase:
(a) Determine whom the project’s stakeholders are by analyzing whether or not their interests and
the project’s interests are aligned.
(b) Determine the degree to which each stakeholder may inﬂuence the project.
(c) Put in place the necessary mechanisms to open up communication lines with the relevant
stakeholders.
2. Developing a research proposal [28]: A template for research is a conventional paper that follows
a preset framework and deviates from it only slightly. Several of these constituents may be broken
down into the following categories [29]:
(a) Title
(b) Introduction
(c) Literature Review
(d) Methodology
(e) Plan - Timeline and schedule of activities
(f) Budget
(g) Details of the research team (signed CV)
3. Identifying research funding: The funding available dictates both the breadth of research topics
that may be investigated and the nature of the ﬁndings that can be gleaned from that investigation.
In most cases, ﬁnancing is perceived in an overly simpliﬁed manner; there are national research
councils, large charities, and government grants; nevertheless, other single funding organizations and
instruments are being overlooked [30].
4. Costing and pricing of a research project : Due to the fact that there are many different factors
involved, the costing section of a study proposal is the most difﬁcult element to complete. However,
there are a number of other cases from which parallels may be made, and central research ofﬁcials
are also responsible for calculating the cost.
The most important distinction between estimating costs and setting prices is as follows:
(a) The cost is ﬁgured by using the entire economic costing method (FEC). It takes into account all
of the direct and indirect expenditures, including pay for employees, depreciation, space, central
services, and a contribution to the university’s infrastructure [31].
(b) Following the cost computation, the price is the amount that is requested.
5. Internal approval for research proposal : There should be a consensus among all the entities
involved in the research for submitting the proposal for research funding. This process should stand
aligned with local policies before contacting any external funder.
6. Submitting a proposal: The various entities should sign off on the research proposal before it is
submitted. Most proposals are electronic, and various nuances accompanying this process should be
considered and fulﬁlled. All the entities should register to the system for the proposal to be submitted.
7
6 Proposed Solution And Architecture
The funding and ﬁnancing system that exists is very opaque and has not evolved in a very long time. Modern
solutions in the domain of blockchain can help evolve the system of funding so that both parties (researchers and
funding organizations) can beneﬁt from each other. Since the launch of the ETH mainnet in the year of 2015,
there have been several open marketplaces, mainly for the purpose of selling tokens (mainly ERC721(NFTs));
the base architecture of these marketplaces can be used in constructing an open knowledge marketplace. The
facets of knowledge monetization addressed by the proposed framework can be enumerated in the following
order:
1. Connecting researchers and funding associations - Various individuals or groups seeking funding can
list their interest’s in the form of listing in these markets. The funding associations (in the form of
DAOs) can provide funding to these listings. Several or individual funding associations can together
fund these listed research projects.
2. Providing Data - Several individuals or organizations that wish to license data can do the same in
knowledge marketplaces in a very efﬁcient manner. Due to the transparent nature of blockchain-based
marketplaces, data access can be checked. Due to this, the incentive gap can be ﬁlled.
3. Building on top of the base layer - Several data points can be tracked based on the interactions in
the market. Due to the transparent nature, all the data generated in this market can be studied by
individuals or organizations and advanced analytics can be generated from indexing the blockchain
data, and statistics for researchers and funding associations will be widely available.
6.1 Connecting Researchers And Potential Funding Agencies
Figure 3: Graph For Obtaining Cooperation Fit Index (Discrete Skill vs Score)
Active inference is a method that may be utilized for the purpose of assessing whether or not certain investors
and researchers are compatible with one another. The design and upkeep of an autonomously functioning
complicated system is one of the most important components of the Active Inference architecture. This may be
utilized as a resource for the development of teams in research settings. The process involved in this mapping
operation for synergistic collaboration can be summarized as:
8
1. At time t = 0, the proposer presents a project and determines the distribution of skills needed for its
completion. This distribution is then geometrically transposed onto a coordinate space with discrete
skills as the axis, and the preferences of the Lab’s members are then assigned to the corresponding
radii. The area under the red curve (overlap) in Figure 3 is proportional to the cooperation ﬁt index
between the individual agents and the project.
2. We determine the marginal probability of the research aim (o) and overlapping skill set (s) for
participating researchers as shown in equation 1 at time t, when group strength has just crossed the
threshold of 1, and use this information to determine the stability of the created system.
∑
s
p(s, o) (1)
The proposed framework employs sophisticated logic to discover a solution because estimating
marginal probabilities is frequently computationally difﬁcult (a corollary to surprise minimization in
Active Inference theory, equation 2).
F =
∑
s
q(s) ln q(s)
p(s, o) (2)
Creating an upper bound by using the identity of the Jensen inequality (equation 3), which is termed
as Free energy (F). Now, minimizing the Free Energy is the optimization challenge for the stability of
the system. This procedure changes states repeatedly (like adding or removal of a member).
−ln
∑
s
q(s)
[p(s, o)
q(s)
]
≤−
∑
s
q(s)
[
ln p(s, o)
q(s)
]
= F (3)
3. The proposed framework must now create sub-groups in order to have a functional research niche.
This might be accomplished by algorithmic permutation throughout the range of potential conﬁg-
urations, from completely symmetrical sub-groups (each having the same number of members) to
perfectly asymmetrical groupings (each with different numbers). In Algorithm 1, the quantized
stability quotient for simultaneous creation and existence is shown. Although this "selection of
project groups" is carried out by Humans (through Affordances, in Roles), it may be viewed as a
choice of organizational policy. The set of potential teams in this situation (policy evaluation at
lab size over team composition) is made up of all conceivable deployment potentials of eligible
participants into project-speciﬁc roles. Given that this affordance space is discrete and ﬁnite, it might
be able to precisely design and carry out this group formation strategy choice.
Algorithm 1 Finding Stable Sub-Group Conﬁguration
1: F ←Free Energy
2: n ←total system strength
3: sn ←sub −group strength
4: g ←possible sub−group strength ⊿ range 2 to n; all conﬁgurations
5:
6: for i in (g/sn) do
7: F[i]=sum(F(g,sn)) ⊿ Perfectly Symmetrical Sub-Groups
8: end for
9: for i in (g[i]/sn[i]) do
10: F[i]=sum(F(g,sn)) ⊿ Perfectly Asymmetrical Sub-Groups
11: end for
9
6.2 Monetization And Exchange of Knowledge Assets
Figure 4: Roles And Processes Associated With The Proposed Framework
Within the scope of this portion of the paper, the authors investigate the method of monetizing knowledge
assets and exchanging them, which is illustrated in Figure 4. Both of these entities, investors and researchers
10
will be brought together through the formation of knowledge markets; once an association has been established,
the steps outlined below can be taken:
1. Using a known structure in traditional decentralized funding via the means of DAO: One of these
traditional funding schemes is called DAICO (DAO + ICO). DAICO was proposed by Vitalik
Buterin in 2018 to make the process of ICO more secure for investors during the initial stages of the
development process. The investors have control over the funds, and part-wise allocation based on
the proposal submitted by the seekers can be voted on, and based on the votes, payouts can be made.
2. This approach helps form the following affordances:
(a) The researchers will raise a proposal for the undertaking in a standardized template.
(b) The investors will go through the proposal and will determine the value that the undertaking
brings to the entirety of the project (actuarial analysis).
(c) After the analysis, the investors will vote on the proposal; if 51% of the votes are in favor of the
proposal, then the funds get released to the researchers. In the case that the proposal gets less
than 51% percent of the votes, the investors will have to provide the reason for the rejection of
the proposal. Researchers can redo the proposal and resubmit it with modiﬁcations in accordance
with the comments provided by the investors.
(d) In case there is a prolonged disagreement between the two parties, there can be a proposal for
forfeiting the bond. This disagreement can be determined mathematically with the use of free
energy analysis.
3. The funders will have to provide about 30% of the promised amount up front in an escrow account,
this may be released on completing milestones, but this will be the minimum guaranteed amount. In
case the funders don’t plan to pursue the whole research endeavor, the researchers will be guaranteed
the 30
7 Conclusion
In this paper, the focal objective was to investigate the feasibility of integrating blockchain technology and
active inference with the knowledge monetizing sector. The paper proposes a decentralized framework to
function as a knowledge and services exchange platform by embedding the recent technologies in blockchain
and active inference. To ensure the knowledge is fairly and securely monetized, authors have proposed a
comprehensive design that makes use of blockchain technology, which is becoming increasingly popular, to
ensure the knowledge is monetized with the guarantees of monetary impartiality, knowledge conﬁdentiality,
and reﬁned automating. Moreover, the proposed framework also employs active inference that ensures a
synergistic collaboration between the stakeholders of the knowledge marketplace. The authors plan to advance
toward the notion of digital ownership and further develop the offered solution of mapping the potential
investors and researchers across the network. The authors want to evaluate their suggested method across
many blockchain platforms and consensus mechanisms.
References
[1] Thomas H Davenport, Laurence Prusak, et al. Working knowledge: How organizations manage what
they know. Harvard Business Press, 1998.
[2] Kostas Kafentzis, Gregoris Mentzas, Dimitris Apostolou, and Panos Georgolios. Knowledge mar-
ketplaces: strategic issues and business models. Journal of Knowledge Management, 8(1):130–146,
2004.
11
[3] Dan Peng, Fan Wu, and Guihai Chen. Pay as how well you do: A quality based incentive mechanism for
crowdsensing. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking
and Computing, pages 177–186, 2015.
[4] Jianping Li, Yongjia Xie, Dengsheng Wu, and Yuanping Chen. Underestimating or overestimating
the distribution inequality of research funding? the inﬂuence of funding sources and subdivision.
Scientometrics, 112(1):55–74, 2017.
[5] Tom Kwanya. Knowledge marketplaces: enhancing knowledge creation and diffusion amongst national
civil society organisations in developing countries. In Proceedings of the The 11th International
Knowledge Management in Organizations Conference on The changing face of Knowledge Management
Impacting Society, pages 1–8, 2016.
[6] Zibin Zheng, Shaoan Xie, Hong-Ning Dai, Xiangping Chen, and Huaimin Wang. Blockchain challenges
and opportunities: A survey. International journal of web and grid services, 14(4):352–375, 2018.
[7] Sarah Underwood. Blockchain beyond bitcoin. Communications of the ACM, 59(11):15–17, 2016.
[8] Satoshi Nakamoto and A Bitcoin. A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Bitcoin.–URL: https://bitcoin.
org/bitcoin. pdf, 4:2, 2008.
[9] Yang Hu, Harold Glenn A Valera, and Les Oxley. Market efﬁciency of the top market-cap cryptocurren-
cies: Further evidence from a panel framework. Finance Research Letters, 31:138–145, 2019.
[10] Thomas Parr, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Karl J Friston. Active inference: the free energy principle in mind,
brain, and behavior. MIT Press, 2022.
[11] Ryan Smith, Philipp Schwartenbeck, Thomas Parr, and Karl J Friston. An active inference approach
to modeling structure learning: Concept learning as an example case. Frontiers in computational
neuroscience, 14:41, 2020.
[12] Roger C Conant and W Ross Ashby. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system.
International journal of systems science, 1(2):89–97, 1970.
[13] Samer Hassan and Primavera De Filippi. Decentralized autonomous organization. Internet Policy Review,
10(2):1–10, 2021.
[14] Youssef Faqir-Rhazoui, Javier Arroyo, and Samer Hassan. A comparative analysis of the platforms for
decentralized autonomous organizations in the ethereum blockchain. Journal of Internet Services and
Applications, 12(1):1–20, 2021.
[15] Vitalik Buterin et al. A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application platform. white
paper, 3(37):2–1, 2014.
[16] Van Cuong Bui, Sheng Wen, Jiangshan Yu, Xin Xia, Mohammad Sayad Haghighi, and Yang Xiang. Eval-
uating upgradable smart contract. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain),
pages 252–256, 2021.
[17] A Frost. An educational km site—content management systems http://www. knowledge-management-
tools. net/knowledge-management-systems. html, 2016.
[18] Denéle Esterhuizen, Cornelius SL Schutte, and Adeline SA Du Toit. Knowledge creation processes as
critical enablers for innovation. International Journal of Information Management, 32(4):354–364, 2012.
[19] Ikujiro Nonaka and Hirotaka Takeuchi. The knowledge-creating company: How japanese companies
create the dynamics of innovation. Long range planning, 4(29):592, 1996.
12
[20] Melissa M Appleyard and Gretchen A Kalsow. Knowledge diffusion in the semiconductor industry.
Journal of Knowledge Management, 1999.
[21] David E Wojick, Walter L Warnick, Bonnie C Carroll, and June Crowe. The digital road to scientiﬁc
knowledge diffusion; a faster, better way to scientiﬁc progress? D-Lib Magazine, 12(6), 2006.
[22] Chaomei Chen and Diana Hicks. Tracing knowledge diffusion. Scientometrics, 59(2):199–211, 2004.
[23] Wesley M Cohen and Daniel A Levinthal. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation. Administrative science quarterly, pages 128–152, 1990.
[24] Chengjun Cai, Yifeng Zheng, Anxin Zhou, and Cong Wang. Building a secure knowledge marketplace
over crowdsensed data streams. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 18(6):2601–
2616, 2019.
[25] Zhi Li, Wai Ming Wang, Guo Liu, Layne Liu, Jiadong He, and George Q Huang. Toward open
manufacturing: A cross-enterprises knowledge and services exchange framework based on blockchain
and edge computing. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 2018.
[26] 08fd56ae-b95a-4f19-bc0f a1f100b2d02f. Research project stakeholders, Feb 2015.
[27] Jan Karlsen. Project stakeholder management. Engineering Management Journal, 14, 12 2002.
[28] 08fd56ae-b95a-4f19-bc0f a1f100b2d02f. Developing a research proposal, Jul 2015.
[29] Sherina Mohd Sidik, Sidik Mmed, and Fam Med. How to write a research proposal. The Family
Physician, 13, 01 2005.
[30] Kaare Aagaard, Philippe Mongeon, Irene Ramos-Vielba, and Duncan Andrew Thomas. Getting to
the bottom of research funding: Acknowledging the complexity of funding dynamics. Plos one,
16(5):e0251488, 2021.
[31] Costing a proposal.
13