arXiv:1504.01837v2  [astro-ph.SR]  27 Apr 2015
P ARAMETRIC MODULA TION OF DYNAMO W A VES
L. L. Kitchatinov 1, 2∗, A. A. Nepomnyashchikh 1, 3
1Institute for Solar-Terrestrial Physics, Lermontov Str. 126A, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia
2Pulkovo Astronomical Observatory, Pulkovskoe Sh. 65, St. Petersburg, 196140, Russia
3Irkutsk State University, Gagarin Str. 20, 664003, Russia
Long-term variations of solar activity , including the Gran d minima, are
believed to result from temporal variations of dynamo param eters. The simplest
approximation of dynamo waves is applied to show that cyclic variations
of the parameters can lead to an exponential growth or decay o f magnetic
oscillations depending on the variations frequency . There is no parametric
resonance in a dynamo, however: the selective sensitivity t o distinct frequencies,
characteristic of resonant phenomena, is absent. A qualita tive explanation for this
ﬁnding is suggested. Nonlinear analysis of dynamo-waves re veals the hysteresis
phenomenon found earlier in more advanced models. However, the simpliﬁed
model allows a computation of a suﬃciently large number of dy namo-cycles
for constructing the distribution function of their amplit udes to reproduce
qualitatively two modes of solar activity inferred recentl y from cosmogenic
isotope content in natural archives.
Key words: dynamo - Sun: activity - stars: activity
∗ E-mail:kit@iszf.irk.ru
1
INTRODUCTION
Hydrodynamic ﬂows generating cosmic magnetic ﬁelds usuall y vary with time. Parame-
ters of the generation processes - hydromagnetic dynamos - a re, therefore, time-dependent.
V ariations of dynamo-parameters can be either periodic, as in the case of modulation by
density waves in galactic dynamos, or irregular, as in stell ar convection zones. The case
of irregular variations currently attracts much attention in relation to the Grand minima
of solar activity (cf., e.g., the review of Charbonneau 2010 ), events similar to the famous
Maunder minimum when there were almost no sunspots for about 70 years (Hoyt &
Schatten 1996).
The number of large-scale convective cells generating magn etic ﬁelds in the Sun is
not large (Gilman & Miller 1985) so the longitude-averaged d ynamo parameters ﬂuctuate
considerably (Olemskoy et al. 2013). Fluctuations of dynam o-parameters are believed to
be responsible for the observed variations of solar cycle du rations and amplitudes and even
for the events of Grand minima. Dynamo models with ﬂuctuatin g parameters generally
reproduce these observed phenomena (cf., e.g., Moss et al. 2 008; Usoskin et al. 2009;
Choudhuri & Karak 2012; Karak & Choudhuri 2013; Olemskoy & Ki tchatinov 2013).
Relations between the ﬂuctuation properties and the result ing variations in magnetic
cycles remain, however, unknown. In particular, the import ant theoretical question on
the possibility of parametric resonance in dynamos † remains unanswered. It is not clear
whether there are special frequencies in the ﬂuctuations sp ectrum to which the ﬁeld
generation processes are especially sensitive. In some dyn amo models, the characteristic
ﬂuctuation time was put equal to a half of the magnetic cycle p eriod, which corresponds to
the parametric resonance condition for harmonic oscillato r, but an enhanced reaction on
ﬂuctuations of such a duration was not found. The reason prob ably is that contemporary
dynamo models are numerical and it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd function al relations from the results
of numerical computations.
Probably for the same reason, the publications on resonant p henomena in dynamos are
not many . The dynamo equations do not possess sources of magn etic ﬁelds. The resonance
problem, therefore, does not have an analogue of driving for ce, and only parametric
†The non-periodic character of the parametric ﬂuctuations i s signiﬁcant but not of principal
importance. Stochastic parametric resonance (Klyatskin 1 980) should be considered for this case.
2
resonance can be considered. Schmitt & R¨ udiger (1992) and M oss (1996) studied the
parametric resonance for galactic dynamos. Gilman & Dikpat i (2011) and Moss & Sokoloﬀ
(2013) considered the resonance phenomena for stellar conv ective dynamos. An interesting
version of parametric resonance in nonlinear dynamos was fo und by Reshetnyak (2010):
the resonance can result from a time-delay in the reaction of dynamo-parameters to the
generated magnetic ﬁeld.
This paper suggests using a simpliﬁed dynamo model to treat t he resonance problem
analytically . Analytical solutions may be helpful in under standing the results of more
complicated numerical models. Such an approach proved to be productive in studies
of magneto-rotational instability where a simpliﬁed analy tical model revealed similarity
rules conﬁrmed subsequently by numerical computations (Ki tchatinov & R¨ udiger 2004).
Suﬃcient simpliﬁcation for an analytical treatment of the r esonance problem give an
(local) approximation of dynamo-waves. In this approximat ion, the dynamo-wave length
is assumed short compared to the scale of variations of dynam o parameters. Such a scale
ratio does not hold for the Sun and for corresponding numeric al models of global dynamos.
However, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd a numerical model whose results were not interpretable in
terms of the Y oshimura (1975) law for dynamo-waves propagat ion.
W e shall see that the parametric modulation of dynamo waves c an lead to an exponential
growth or decay of the wave amplitude depending on the freque ncy γ of variation of the α -
parameter of magnetic ﬁeld generation. This modulation, ho wever, is not a resonance. The
enhanced selective reaction to special frequencies, chara cteristic of resonant phenomena, is
not present in dynamos. A qualitative explanation for this c ircumstance will be suggested.
Another problem where the dynamo-wave approximation can be useful is related to
the two distinct modes of solar activity inferred recently b y Usoskin et al. (2014) from
radiocarbon data. The two modes may be related to the hystere sis in nonlinear dynamos:
allowance for the dependence of turbulent diﬀusivity on the magnetic ﬁeld reveals the
coexistence of two stable dynamo solutions with diﬀerent am plitudes of magnetic cycles
that are realised depending on the pre-history of dynamo par ameter variations (Kitchatinov
& Olemskoy 2010). Dynamo-hysteresis was also found in 3D num erical simulations of
Karak et al. (2015). However, a moderate number of magnetic c ycles covered by computations
with complicated models hinders their statistical analysi s. W e shall see that allowance for
3
nonlinearities in the dynamo-wave approximation also show s the hysteresis phenomenon.
Millions of magnetic cycles can be computed with this approx imation. The distribution
function of the amplitudes of these cycles has two maxima sim ilar to the dual distribution
found by Usoskin et al. (2014) from historical data on solar a ctivity .
BASIC EQUA TIONS
W e start from the mean-ﬁeld dynamo equation
∂B
∂t = rot ( α B + V × B − η rot B) (1)
(cf., e.g., Zeldovich et al., 1983). The velocity V corresponds to the shear ﬂow of, e.g.,
non-uniform rotation. Cartesian coordinates are used with the y-axis aligned with the
velocity vector V and the x-axis along the velocity gradient,
V = (0 , Sx, 0) . (2)
Coeﬃcients in the equation (1) and the shear value S are assumed position-independent,
i.e. the scale of magnetic ﬁeld variation is assumed small co mpared to the characteristic
scale of the ﬂuid inhomogeneity (short dynamo-waves). For t he convection zone of a star,
the y-axis of our coordinate system corresponds to the azimuthal direction, the x-axis
points in the direction of the angular velocity gradient and the yz-plane is the isorotation
surface. The magnetic ﬁeld,
B =
(
−∂A
∂z , B, 0
)
, (3)
includes toroidal ( B) and poloidal ( −∂A/∂z ) components.
The ﬁeld B and the poloidal ﬁeld potential A depend only on the coordinate z and
time. The equation system for the two ﬁeld components reads
∂B
∂t = −S ∂A
∂z + η∂2B
∂z2 ,
∂A
∂t = αB + η∂2A
∂z2 , (4)
where the contribution of the α -eﬀect into the toroidal ﬁeld generation is omitted (the
α Ω -dynamo).
W e consider wave-type solutions of A, B ∝ exp(ikz) and normalize the equations (4)
to dimensionless units. Time is measured in units of (k2η0)−1. The η0 is the characteristic
4
value of diﬀusivity , η = η0 ˆη (ˆη ∼ 1), and similar scaling is used for the α -coeﬃcient:
α = α0 ˆα . The potential A is measured in units of α0B0/ (η0k2); B0 is the characteristic
value of the ﬁeld B and simultaneously the unit for ﬁeld measurement. W e keep th e same
notations for normalised variables as used before for their dimensional counterparts to
ﬁnd
˙B = −iDA − ˆηB,
˙A = ˆ αB − ˆηA, (5)
where
D = α0S
η2
0k3 (6)
is the dynamo-number. The parameters ˆα and ˆη may depend on time explicitly , as they
do in the linear problem on parametric resonance, or implici tly via their dependence on
the magnetic ﬁeld amplitude in a nonlinear problem.
ABSENCE OF P ARAMETRIC RESONANCE
If the parameters of Eqs. (5) do not depend on time ( ˆη = ˆα = 1 ), the threshold value of
the dynamo-number for emergence of non-decaying oscillati ons D = 2 (the amplitude of
the oscillations grows exponentially with time for the larg er dynamo number and decays
with time for the smaller D). The eigenvalue problem ( A, B ∝ exp(−iωt )) gives two
solutions for this case,
ω1 = 1 , ω 2 = −1 − 2i, (7)
the ﬁrst of which corresponds to non-decaying oscillations . Let us consider how this
solution changes with allowance for small variations of the ˆα -parameter with time:
ˆα = 1 + εa(t), (8)
where ε ≪ 1 is the amplitude of the parameter perturbations and a ∼ 1. On eliminating
A from equations (5), we ﬁnd
¨B + 2 ˙B + (1 + 2 i + 2iεa(t)) B = 0 . (9)
The problem of parametric resonance concerns periodic vari ations of the parameter
5
with time: a = sin( γt). W e search for the solution in the form
B = e σt
∞∑
n=−∞
bnei(nγ−1)t. (10)
It can be seen that a decomposition of the coeﬃcients bn in powers of the small parameter
ε starts with ε|n|. With accuracy up to the second order in ε, we ﬁnd the amplitudes of
‘satelite’ oscillations,
b1 = ε b 0
γ(γ − 2i − 2), b −1 = − ε b 0
γ(γ + 2i + 2) , (11)
and the eigenvalue
σ = s + i∆ ω, s = ε2
2
γ2 − 8
γ4 + 64 , ∆ ω = ε2
2
γ2 + 8
γ4 + 64 , (12)
including the (real) growth rate s and frequency shift ∆ ω . The approximate solution
(11), (12) is valid for the small ratio ε/γ ≪ 1. It can be seen from the equation (12) for
s that either exponential growth (for γ >
√
8) or decay (for γ <
√
8) of the oscillations is
possible.
It is of course possible to solve Eq. (10) numerically to conf ront the computations
with our approximate analytical solution. Figure 1 gives ex amples of such a comparison
for decaying and growing oscillations. The initial conditi ons for the computations were
B = 1 and ˙B = −i (for t = 0 ). Equations (11) and (12) show that the main consequence of
the parametric modulation - of the ﬁrst order in ε - is the deformation of the oscillations’
shape. V ariation of the oscillation amplitude is the second -order eﬀect. Part (a) of the
Fig. 1 clearly shows the oscillation asymmetry: negative de ﬂections have larger amplitude.
The oscillations grow exponentially for suﬃciently large f requency γ. The growth does
not mean a resonance, however. The dependence of the growth r ate s on the modulation
frequency γ of Eq. (12) is smooth and does not show any selected frequenci es characteristic
of the resonant phenomena. There is, therefore, no parametr ic resonance in the dynamo.
The reason for this can be seen by comparison of the equation ( 9) with the Mathieu
equation for the parametric resonance, which for further di scussion is convenient to write
as
¨X + ω 2
0X = ε sin(γt)X. (13)
With parameter oscillations omitted ( ε = 0 ), there are two eigenfrequencies ω = ±ω0.
Following the simplest perturbation method (not practical but convenient for qualitative
6
Fig. 1. Damped oscillations for γ = 1, ε = 0. 3 (a) and growing oscillations for γ = 5, ε = 0. 7
(b). The full line shows the numerical solution. The dotted l ine shows the analytic trends
±exp(st) for the oscillation amplitude corresponding to the Eq. (12) .
analysis), we can search for the ﬁrst-order corrections in ε by substituting the ‘unperturbed’
solution X ∝ exp(±iω0t) into the right-hand side of (13). This gives a ‘driving force ’
oscillating with the frequencies ±ω0 ± γ (part (a) in Fig. 2). For γ = 2 ω0, the frequencies
−ω0 + γ and ω0 − γ meet the eigenfrequencies of the unperturbed system to prod uce a
resonance. This is why the growth rate for parametric resona nce is of the ﬁrst order in ε
(Landau & Lifshitz 1969). The case with dynamo is diﬀerent (p art (b) in Fig. 2). There
is only one eigenvalue (7) for non-damped oscillations. Dis placements to the left or to the
right by the value γ on the frequency axis from this eigenfrequency , shown by the upper
bows in the part (b) of the Figure, do not lead to other eigenfr equencies. The next step of
the perturbation technique should be undertaken to get a ﬁni te growth rate. This second
step gives once again displacements to the left and right on t he frequency axis shown by
7
 
 
Fig. 2. (а) Schematic representation of the origin of parame tric resonance for oscillations
governed by the Mathieu equation (13). (b) Non-resonant par ametric modulation in a
dynamo (cf. explanation in the text).
the lower bows in Fig. 2(b). The second step of the perturbati on technique returns to the
original eigenfrequency to give a ﬁnite growth rate of the or der ε2 (12). This happens
for any modulation frequency γ. Parametric modulation in a dynamo is, therefore, ‘not
selective’ in γ, i.e. it is not resonant. Parametric resonance is probably p ossible only for
systems with not less than two eigenfrequencies of non-damp ed oscillations, and a resonant
frequency equal to the diﬀerence between these eigenfreque ncies.
W e turn now to the case of a(t) in equation (9) being a random function of time.
For this case, the equation has to be solved numerically . Ran dom function with known
statistical properties can be realized with the equations
da
dt = −a
τ + a1
τ , da1
dt = −a1
τ + g
τ , (14)
where τ is the correlation time and g is a given random forcing. In the computations to
follow, g = ˆg
√
4τ/ ∆ t, where ∆ t is the numerical time step and ˆg is the random number
with normal (Gaussian) distribution, the mean value equal t o zero and RMS value equal
to one. The number is renewed on each time step independent of its preceding value. The
function g represents a short-correlated random process but a(t) is a smooth function of
time with zero mean. For short ∆ t ≪ τ, it represents a stationary (in the statistical sense)
random process with the correlation function (Olemskoy & Ki tchatinov 2013)
⟨a(t0 + t)a(t0)⟩ = ( | t | /τ + 1) exp( − | t | /τ ), (15)
where the angular brackets signify averaging over time t0 (see also Rempel 2005).
Figure 3 shows a characteristic example of the oscillations resulting from a joined
solution of Eqs. (9) and (14). Random wandering of the oscill ation amplitude away from
8
Fig. 3. An example of linear oscillations in the presence of r andom ﬂuctuations of the α -eﬀect.
It results from solving jointly the equations (9) and (14) fo r ε = 0. 3 and τ = 1.
its initial value is typical of linear oscillation with stoc hastically varying parameters
(Klyatskin 1980). Figure 3 also shows this type of behaviour . The diﬀusive wandering of
the dynamo-wave amplitude is by all probability not realist ic. It is stabilized by nonlinear
eﬀects, to the account of which we now turn.
HYSTERESIS IN NONLINEAR DYNAMOS
Dependence of the coeﬃcients of the equation (5) on the magne tic ﬁeld is now allowed
for. The dynamo-wave approximation can still be applied to t he nonlinear problem if the
coeﬃcients ˆα and ˆη are the functions of the amplitude β =| B | of the wave (see Noyes et
al. 1984 for more details). The equation system (5) is no long er reducible to one equation
similar to Eq. (9) in the nonlinear problem.
Instead of the Eq. (8), we now have for the ˆα -coeﬃcient
ˆα = (1 + εa(t)) 15
32β4
(
1 − 4β2
3(1 + β2)2 − 1 − β2
β arctg(β)
)
, (16)
where the dependence on the magnetic ﬁeld is prescribed afte r the prediction of the quasi-
linear theory of the α -eﬀect (R¨ udiger & Kitchatinov 1993). Magnetic quenching o f the
α -eﬀect is usually the only nonlinearity in dynamo models. It suﬃces for stabilizing the
ﬁled growth. The ˆα value decreases with increasing β. The eﬀective dynamo number,
considered as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld, reduces to its critical value to stabilize the
ﬁeld growth.
9
However, not only the α -eﬀect but the eddy diﬀusion as well can depend on the
magnetic ﬁeld. Quasi-linear theory of turbulent transport coeﬃcients predicts
ˆη = 3
8β2
(
1 + 4 + 8 β2
(1 + β2)2 + β2 − 5
β arctg(β)
)
(17)
for the dependence (Kitchatinov et al. 1994). The ˆη, as well as ˆα , decreases steadily with β.
The eﬀective dynamo number Deﬀ = Dˆα/ ˆη2, however, is no longer a monotonic function
of the magnetic ﬁeld. For large β ≫ 1, Deﬀ ∝ β−1 and the nonlinear saturation of the
ﬁeld growth still takes place. For small β ≪ 1, however, the eﬀective dynamo number
increases with the ﬁeld strength. This leads to the hysteres is phenomenon.
Fig. 4. Illustration of hysteresis in nonlinear dynamos. In the range of 0. 6 < D < 2, the
equations (5) with the coeﬃcients (16) and (17) have two stab le solutions of i) oscillations
with a steady and relatively large amplitude β > 1, and ii) decaying oscillations of small
amplitude. The dotted line shows the watershed between the ‘ attraction regions’ of these
two solutions.
In the absence of α -eﬀect ﬂuctuations ( ε = 0 in Eq. (16)), there are two stable solutions
of Eqs. (5) in the range of the dynamo numbers 0. 6 < D < 2 realised depending on the
initial condition. Figure 4 illustrates this situation. Co mputations for a series of increasing
dynamo numbers and a small initial amplitude β show decaying ﬁelds up to dynamo
number D = 2 . When the number D reaches its critical value of Dc = 2 , the decay is
replaced by ﬁeld growth. This leads to an increase in the eﬀec tive dynamo-number and the
10
amplitude of the eventually steady oscillations jumps to a ﬁ nite value of β > 1. A further
increase in dynamo number results in a smooth increase in the amplitude. If the dynamo
number is then changed to a decrease and the amplitude of the p receding computation
is taken as the initial condition, oscillations of ﬁnite amp litude survive for D < 2 up to
D = 0 . 6 but decay indeﬁnitely for still smaller D < 0. 6. The equation Deﬀ (β) = 2 for
the amplitude of the dynamo-wave has two solutions in the ran ge of 0. 6 < D < 2. The
solution of the relatively small amplitude is however unsta ble. This solution is shown by
the dotted line in Fig. 4. This line is the boundary between th e ‘attraction regions’ of the
oscillations with steady and relatively large amplitude (f ull line) and decaying oscillations.
Dynamo waves decay if their initial amplitude is below the do tted line. Above this line,
the amplitude grows initially and then stabilizes.
Fluctuations in dynamo parameters can provoke irregular tr ansitions between the two
solutions. This possibility attracts attention in connect ion with the two modes of solar
activity inferred by Usoskin et al. (2014) from the content o f cosmogenic nuclides in natural
archives. The distribution function of the amplitudes of so lar cycles for about 11 thousand
years that they obtained has two maxima. Such a dual distribu tion was interpreted as a
manifestation of two distinct modes of solar activity .
Recently Karak et al. (2015) found the dynamo-hysteresis in 3D numerical experiments.
Their computations near the critical dynamo number show an i rregular intermittency of
magnetic cycles of relatively large amplitude with weak-ﬁe ld epochs. However, the time
consuming 3D computations did not provide suﬃciently vast s tatistics of magnetic cycles
for ﬁnding their distribution function. This can be done wit h the simpliﬁed dynamo-
equations of this paper. Figure 5 shows the distribution fun ction for one million magnetic
cycles computed by solving numerically equation (5) with al lowance for the nonlinearities
of equations (16) and (17) and the α -eﬀect ﬂuctuations of model (14). The dual distribution
function is qualitatively similar to that found by Usoskin e t al. (2014) from historical data
on solar activity .
It may be noted that the dynamo-hysteresis and irregular tra nsitions between dynamo
modes with diﬀerent amplitudes of magnetic cycles are not re stricted to the special case of
the nonlinearities of Eqs. (16) and (17). The hysteresis is p resent whenever the dependence
of the ratio ˆα/ ˆη2 on the magnetic ﬁeld has a maximum, e.g., for the simplest mod el of
11
Fig. 5. Distribution function for the amplitudes of 106 cycles obtained by solving numerically
equation (5) with allowance for the nonlinearities of Eqs. ( 16), (17) and ﬂuctuations of the
α -eﬀect. Computations were performed for D = 2. 1, ε = 1and τ = 1.
ˆα = (1 + β3)−1 and ˆη = (1 + β)−1.
CONCLUSION
The simplest approximation of the short dynamo-waves of thi s paper certainly does not
allow quantitative reproduction of observations of solar a ctivity . This should be the subject
of detailed numerical models. However, the approximation a llows analytical solutions,
which can be useful in interpreting the results of the numeri cal computations. V ariations
of solar activity , including such impressive phenomena as i ts Grand minima, are related
to ﬂuctuations in dynamo parameters. The majority of models for the Grand minima
assume the characteristic time of the ﬂuctuations equal to t he duration of the (11-year)
activity cycle, i.e. to a half of the entire 22-year magnetic cycle that corresponds to the
12
doubled frequency of the magnetic cycle. An enhanced respon se to ﬂuctuations of such
duration as expected for parametric resonance was not found however. Solution of the
parametric modulation problem for dynamo-waves shows that parametric resonance is
not present in dynamos. Exponential growth or decay of the wa ve amplitude depending
on the frequency of the parametric variations is possible bu t a selective sensitivity to
special frequencies characteristic of the resonant phenom ena does not come out. This is
related to peculiarities of the dynamo mechanism (cf. Fig. 2 and the discussion around).
It becomes clear why the Grand minima statistics can be repro duced with either durable
(Moss et al. 2008) or rapidly varying (Olemskoy et al. 2013) ﬂ uctuations. The ﬂuctuation
parameters should be inferred from observations.
The dynamo-wave approximation turns out to be useful also in the problem of the
origin of the two modes of solar activity indicated by the new data (Usoskin et al. 2014).
The two modes may be explained by the hysteresis in nonlinear dynamos ( Kitchatinov
& Olemskoy 2010; Karak et al. 2015). Hysteresis is also found in the dynamo-wave
approximation, which permits its detailed analysis (Fig. 4 ). In contrast to more complicated
models, computations with this approximation are not numer ically demanding. It is
therefore possible to accumulate the statistics of compute d magnetic cycles suﬃcient
for constructing a distribution function of the cycles’ amp litudes. A dual distribution is
obtained qualitatively similar to that found by Usoskin et a l. (2014) from radiocarbon
data on solar activity .
This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic R esearch (Project N ◦
13-02-00277).
REFERENCES
Charbonneau, P . 2010, Living Rev. Solar Phys. 7, 3
Choudhuri, A. R., & Karak, B. B. 2012, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 171103
Gilman, P . A., & Dikpati, M. 2011, ApJ 738, 108
Gilman, P . A., & Miller, J. 1985, ApJS 61, 585
Hoyt, D. V., & Schatten, K. H. 1996, Solar Phys. 165, 181
13
Karak, B. B. & Choudhuri, A. R. 2013, Res. Astron. Astrophys. 13, 1339
Karak, B. B., Kitchatinov, L. L., & Brandenburg, A. 2015, ApJ accepted, arXiv: 1411.0485
Kitchatinov, L. L., & Olemskoy , S. V. 2010, Astron. Lett. 36, 292
Kitchatinov, L. L., & R¨ udiger, G. 2004, A&A 424, 565
Kitchatinov, L. L., Pipin, V. V., & R¨ udiger, G. 1994, Astron . Nachr. 315, 157
Klyatskin, V. I. 1980, Stochastic Equations and W aves in Randomly-Inhomogeneous
Media (Moscow, Nauka Publishers) [in Russian]
Landau, L. D., & Lifshitz, E. M. 1969, A Course of Theoretical Physics. V olume 1:
Mechanics (Pergamon Press)
Moss, D. 1996, A&A 308, 381
Moss, D., & Sokoloﬀ, D. 2013, A&A 553, A37
Moss, D., Sokoloﬀ, D., Usoskin, I., & T utubalin, V. 2008, Sol ar Phys. 250, 221
Noyes, R. W., W eiss, N. O., & V aughan, A. H. 1984, ApJ 287, 769
Olemskoy , S. V., & Kitchatinov, L. L. 2013, ApJ 777, 71
Olemskoy , S. V., Choudhury , A. R., & Kitchatinov, L. L. 2013, Astron. Rep. 57, 458
Rempel, M. 2005, ApJ 631, 1286
Reshetnyak, M. Y u. 2010, Astron. Rep. 54, 1047
R¨ udiger, G., & Kitchatinov, L. L. 1993, A&A 269, 581
Schmitt, D., & R¨ udiger, G. 1992, A&A 264, 319
Usoskin, I. G., Sokoloﬀ, D., & Moss, D. 2009, Solar Phys. 254, 345
Usoskin, I. G., Hulot, G., Gallet, Y. et al. 2014, A&A 562, L10
Y oshimura, H. 1975, ApJ 201, 740
Zeldovich, Y a. B., Ruzmaikin, A. A., & Sokolov, D. D. 1983, Magnetic Fields in Astrophysics
(New Y ork: Gordon & Breach)
14