Semantic Trajectory Data Mining with LLM-Informed POI
Classification
Yifan Liu, Chenchen Kuai, Xishun Liao*, Haoxuan Ma, Brian Yueshuai He, and Jiaqi Ma
Abstract— Human travel trajectory mining is crucial for
transportation systems, enhancing route optimization, traffic
management, and the study of human travel patterns. While
previous studies have primarily focused on spatial-temporal
information, the integration of semantic data has been limited,
leading to constraints in efficiency and accuracy. Semantic
information, such as activity types inferred from Points of
Interest (POI) data, can significantly enhance the quality of
trajectory mining. However, integrating these insights is chal-
lenging, as many POIs have incomplete feature information, and
learning-based POI algorithms require the integrity of datasets
to do the classification. In this paper, we introduce a novel
pipeline for human travel trajectory mining, annotating GPS
trajectories with POIs and visit purpose. Our approach first
leverages the strong inferential and comprehension capabilities
of large language models (LLMs) to link POI with activity types
and then uses a Bayesian-based algorithm to infer activity for
each stay point in a trajectory. In our evaluation using the
OpenStreetMap POI dataset, our approach achieves a 93.4%
accuracy and a 96.1% F-1 score in POI classification, and a
91.7% accuracy with a 92.3% F-1 score in activity inference.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The rapid development of Internet-of-Thing (IoT) technol-
ogy and applications facilitates the evolution of intelligent
transportation systems and brings a new era of data collec-
tion [1], [2]. This flourish yields an abundance of trajectory
data from a wide range of connected devices and allows us
to explore human travel behavior with additional detail and
accuracy. The advent of GPS-enabled mobile devices has
revolutionized the tracking of individuals, vehicles, trains,
and even animals through the collection of digital traces or
trajectories [3], [4], [5], [6], enabling the study of travel
behaviors.
However, current GPS-based datasets contain only spatial-
temporal information, which limits their ability to fully
address the complexities of mobility behavior studies, espe-
cially when it comes to understanding human mobility. For
instance, these datasets do not capture the travel intentions
behind each stay point, as human travel often involves spe-
cific purposes and underlying interdependencies. Therefore,
to model human mobility patterns more accurately, there is
a growing demand to integrate GPS-based trajectory data
with semantic information. As pointed out in [7], this
integration facilitates applications in traffic management,
disease analysis, and human movement studies.
An integrated dataset combining location trajectories with
semantic information would ideally include not only the
The authors are with the UCLA Mobility Lab under the Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, USA.
*Corresponding author: xishunliao@ucla.edu
spatial-temporal data but also information about nearby
Points of Interest (POIs), the purpose of visits, and other
contextual details. Such a dataset would provide a more
comprehensive view of human mobility patterns, allowing
for deeper insights into travel behaviors and motivations.
To create such integrated datasets and effectively mine
trajectory data, accurate POI classification is crucial. The
effectiveness of trajectory mining heavily relies on the
accuracy of POI classification, which is also crucial for
applications like navigation, local searches, and analyzing
human travel patterns [8], [9], [10]. A reliable POI classi-
fication algorithm can notably enhance the usability, func-
tionality, and effectiveness of these applications by ensuring
the quality of POI data categorization. Despite their impor-
tance, existing learning-based classification methods suffer
from considerable variability within open-source datasets like
OpenStreetMap (OSM) [11], and discrepancies widen when
multiple data sources are considered. This inconsistency not
only complicates schema alignment but also significantly
limits the amount and quality of usable data. Efforts to
synchronize these disparate data schema are time-consuming
and often result in loss of data granularity and reliability.
In this paper, we introduce a data mining frame work to
annotate trajectory with semantic information. Compared to
existing literature, the main contributions of this paper are:
• We introduce a novel data mining framework to anno-
tate trajectories with activities, which integrates LLM-
based POI classification with a probabilistic activity in-
ference algorithm. This semantic annotation of time se-
ries data bridges spatial-temporal and natural language
analyses in trajectory mining, opening new avenues for
mobility research.
• The proposed framework is adaptable across various
regional POI or trajectory datasets without additional
training. It effectively handles POI classification even
with open-source datasets that have incomplete data,
eliminating the need for high data integrity.
• Leveraging the semantic information inferred from POIs
provided by LLM outputs, our activity inference al-
gorithm achieves precise point-level inference. To our
knowledge, this is the first application of LLM to POI
classification.
II. L ITERATURE REVIEW
A. POI Classification
The classification of POIs involves assigning categories
to each observation based on location types (restau-
rants, schools) or associated activities (shopping, working).
arXiv:2405.11715v2  [cs.AI]  19 Aug 2024
Fig. 1: Architecture of the proposed framework from POI classification (left) to activity Inference (right).
Learning-based methods like SVM initially addressed this
by leveraging additional textual information, achieving up
to 73% accuracy on the Yelp dataset with 20 different
categories [12]. Integrating spatial, textual, and property
features further enhanced classification, with methods like
k-Nearest Neighbors achieving up to 91% top-10 accuracy
in the OSM dataset with 14 categories [13].
As the number of features expands, assessing feature
importance for classification has become crucial. Methods
like Linear Discriminant Analysis, kNN, and Random Forest
are used to evaluate feature significance in classification
tasks [14]. Research shows that feature importance varies by
geographical location and category, complicating the creation
of a universally effective algorithm for diverse datasets.
Previous methods predominantly used learning-based al-
gorithms, improving performance via feature extension and
data from external sources. In practice, missing features
and the challenge of synchronizing diverse data sources
complicate classification. Labeling variability, such as OSM
datasets from Egypt that feature names exclusively in Arabic,
limits the effectiveness of these algorithms.
These challenges highlight the need for more robust and
adaptable algorithms. LLMs trained with diverse data in-
cluding internet content, excel in various applications with
their strong generalization and inference capabilities [15].
Our approach utilizes LLMs to address these issues, provid-
ing an efficient method for classifying POIs across diverse
datasets without requiring complete data or additional feature
extensions.
B. Activity Inference
Trajectory data from GPS devices documents daily trips as
sequences of geo-coordinates, revealing insights into human
activities like shopping or dining. However, inferring trip
purposes is challenging due to GPS inaccuracies and the
vague information in POI datasets [16].
Studies have used spatial and temporal features from tra-
jectories to infer travel behaviors. While rule-based methods
accurately predict mandatory activities like home and work
due to strong periodicity, they struggle with complex non-
mandatory activities like social visits [17], [18]. To improve
inference, some methods integrate POI data, using GNN and
Dynamic Bayesian Networks to better predict activity types,
though precision remains an issue due to the coarse data [19],
[20].
To address these issues, our model is designed to accu-
rately infer activity types using point-level POIs, rather than
broader zonal data. Leveraging prior knowledge of activity
temporal distributions improves accuracy significantly. We
overcome these challenges with a Bayesian-based algorithm
that incorporates the context of nearby POIs.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The architecture of our trajectory mining framework is
illustrated in Fig. 1. We first perform POI classification
by reformulating the task description and candidate activity
types into natural language representations. This information
is then combined with the POI observations to determine
the three most likely activity types for each POI using
LLM. Meanwhile, we engage in prompt engineering to refine
the quality of outputs based on the model’s performance.
Following this, we integrate stay point [21] information
and implement a Bayesian-based inference algorithm to
accurately associate each stay point with potential POIs and
activity types in the human trajectory data.
A. Problem Formulation
Given the POIs and stay points from trajectory data, the
task is to infer activity types for stay points in the trajectory
data, and the mathematical expressions and definitions are
provided:
POI: The point of interest observations are denoted as
P = {p1, p2, ..., pI}, where each observation pi consists of
⟨Name, Lon, Lat, f1, f2...fn⟩, indicating the name, longitude,
latitude and available features ( fn) of the POI.
Trajectory: The trajectory data traces are denoted as T =
{Traj 1, Traj2, ..., TrajN}.
Stay Point: For each trajectory of person n, the stay points
are defined as locations where the person remains stationary
for a duration of time. A trajectory could have multiple stay
points Traj = {S1, S2, ..., SK}. Each stay point contains
information of (tS, tE,Lon,lat), representing the start time,
end time, longitude, and latitude of the stay point.
Given information of each stay points S and POI records
P, the goal is to annotate each stay point with an activity A
for the whole trajectory dataset T .
Fig. 2: Example of the prompt and output from LLM.
B. POI Classification
Different from learning-based algorithms that derive re-
lationships between POI features and categories from la-
beled data samples, LLM leverages its powerful inferencing
capabilities to respond to open-ended text-based questions
without requiring additional training. In our approach, we
reframe the classification task into a text-based question
format where LLMs excel and design efficient prompts that
precisely describe the problem, allowing the LLM to interpret
and classify POIs effectively based on the context provided
in the prompts.
As shown in Fig. 3 as an example, the prompt is composed
of three distinct components:
Task Description: Outlines the POI classification task,
detailing input data and the desired output structure. This
sets the framework for the LLM’s approach to data analysis
and classification.
Category Description: Provides a detailed description of
each target category, including definitions and examples. This
helps guide the LLM in accurately classifying POIs into
relevant categories.
POI Observation: Describes dataset features and their
values in natural language format, ensuring the model could
fully understand and process each POI’s characteristics as
described in the data.
Notably, prompt fine-tuning can be utilized to meet spe-
cific needs when working with diverse datasets or various
category sets, as LLMs are not limited by text input formats.
For instance, in the Egyptian POI collection where some
POI names are provided only in Arabic, we can enhance the
model’s understanding by explicitly stating in the prompt
like “some names in the ‘name’ column are in Arabic.”
Additionally, for datasets that only contain POIs from public
spaces, we can point out the source of the dataset in the
prompt, and amenities like “toilets” will not be classified
as “home activity.” Moreover, when dealing with real-world
datasets where features often missing such as a POI labeled
only with the amenity type “visitor parking”, it can be
challenging to determine whether this POI belongs to the
category “visit friends” or “pick up/drop off.” For such cases,
we can refine the prompt to guide the LLM in identifying
the three most relevant categories for the POI, complete with
probability scores for each. This tailored approach guides the
model to provide meaningful classifications even with limited
data, and these probabilities can be further utilized in other
tasks, such as activity inference.
C. Activity Inference
Activity inference involves considering many factors, such
as the time of the day, the category of the visited location,
and the functionality of the location, requiring detailed
information. However, the privacy implications of the use
of location-based services [22], especially identifying spe-
cific POIs in the trajectory, are raising serious concerns.
It could potentially disclose any specific user’s daily ac-
tivities, interests, and even personal habits. Thus, it is not
appropriate to match the stay points in real trajectory data
with specific POIs to conduct the inference. Therefore, an
effective activity inference model must carefully balance the
inclusion of detailed information with privacy safeguards. In
the following parts, we elaborate a rule-based algorithm for
mandatory activities inference and a probabilistic model for
non-mandatory activities inference as shown in Fig. 3.
Mandatory Activity Inference: Our mandatory activity
Fig. 3: Flow chart of activity inference procedure.
inference algorithm identifies three primary activities: Home,
Work, and School, using a rule-based approach [18]. The
Home activity is determined by the stay point with the
highest visit frequency during off-hours (7 pm to 8 am).
Work activity is inferred by analyzing stay points not marked
as Home, focusing on those with the highest visit frequency
and travel distance from Home during typical work hours on
weekdays (8 am to 7 pm). For Schools, stay points closest
to ‘education’ POIs with the most travel from Home during
weekdays’ school hours are selected (8 am to 7 pm). This
algorithm utilizes stay point data and proximity to relevant
POIs to categorize mandatory activities effectively.
Non-mandatory Activity Inference:
In contrast, non-mandatory activities, which vary more in
periodicity and frequency, require a probabilistic approach
for inference. We calculate the likelihood of activities at a
stay point by considering the nearby K POIs, the noise-
adjusted radius, and the start time tS of the stay.
The probability of an activity type Am can be formulated
as the equation below, given the surrounding POIs P =
{p1, ..., pk} and the stay point start time tS:
P(Am | P, tS) =
X
K
P(Am | pk, tS)P(pk) (1)
Next, we use Bayes’ theorem to refine the probability
given pk and tS:
P(Am | pk, tS) = P(tS | Am)P(Am | pk)
P(tS | pk) (2)
Substituting this back into our initial equation, we obtain
the final expression to calculate the probability of a certain
activity Am:
P(Am | P, tS) =
X
K
P(tS | Am)
P(tS | pk) P(Am | pk)P(pk)
(3)
Assuming the start time tS and a specific pk is indepen-
dence, P(tS | pk) becomes a constant value, and we can
obtain:
P(Am | P, tS) =
X
K
P(tS | Am)P(Am | pk)P(pk) (4)
Each POI pk is assigned top three possible activity types
A1,2,3 and their probability P(A1,2,3 | pk) by LLM. P(tS |
Am) can be estimated from the 2017 National Household
Travel Survey (NHTS) California Add-on dataset [23]. The
total conditional probability can be represented in a K × 3
matrix (as in Table III), listing all possible probabilities for
each POI and their corresponding activity types. The model
then selects the highest probability among the possible POI
and activity type combinations as the inferred activity result.
IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Dataset
To evaluate our approach across various contexts and
assess its effectiveness, we use open-source data from Los
Angeles (LA) County and Egypt, sourced from OSM. This
data enables us to rigorously test the performance of our POI
classification algorithm.
The dataset is structured as a directed, connected network
with POIs, each associated with metadata tags found on
the network’s edges or vertices. Given that OSM is a free,
open geographic database maintained by volunteers through
open collaboration, the data exhibits significant diversity in
terms of quality, format, and variety. This includes a range
of location-specific details such as buildings, amenities,
and infrastructure elements like roads and railways. While
it offers higher information entropy to the LLM, it also
complicates predictions due to ambiguous or contradictory
labels. For instance, a church in OSM could be labeled as a
place of worship, a tourist attraction, and an office building
simultaneously. While this might seem contradictory at first
glance, such a POI is applicable in all three contexts, whether
an agent is going for worship, tourism, or work.
Despite the crucial “names” feature being present, 89% of
the content in other features such as “amenity,” “building
type,” and “land use” is missing in the Egypt dataset,
and similarly, 91% is missing in the LA dataset. Utilizing
datasets like OSM enables us to evaluate the resilience
of our methodology in challenging conditions due to the
inconsistent labeling style and incomplete data in the real-
world scenario.
B. Evaluation Setting
Our study covers 15 activity categories [23] to capture a
wide range of daily activities, ensuring the dataset reflects
the diversity of human behavior, as detailed in Table I.
TABLE I: Activity category code and their corresponding
descriptions
1 Home 2 Work 3 School
4 Caregiving 5 Buy goods 6 Buy services
7 Buy meals 8 General errands 9 Recreational
10 Exercise 11 Visit friends 12 Health care
13 Religious 14 Something else 15 Drop off/Pick up
1) POI classification: Evaluating the performance of our
POI classification method presents challenges typical of an
unsupervised learning setting, where no pre-existing ground
truth is available. To address this, we randomly sample
500 observations from each POI dataset in both Egypt
and LA County and create a manual ground truth. The
accuracy of our method was then benchmarked against this
human-labeled ground truth. To minimize labeling bias, five
volunteers are enlisted to categorize the labels under uniform
standards. Finally, we employ the language models ‘gpt-3.5-
turbo (gpt3.5)’ and ‘gpt-4 (gpt4)’ from OpenAI, prompting
them to identify the top three most relevant categories for
each POI, along with the associated probabilities.
2) Activity Inference: After completing the POI classifica-
tion using the ‘gpt-3.5’ model, we obtain a dataset of 85,696
POIs, each annotated with possible activity categories, from
LA County. This dataset serves as the input for the activity
inference process, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
To assess the efficacy of our proposed activity inference
model, we curate a test trajectory dataset by extracting
activities from the NHTS California Add-on dataset [23],
focusing on LA County. This dataset provides detailed daily
travel trajectories, with each trajectory consisting of activities
and a rough location at the zonal level. However, due to
the lack of POIs associated with these activities, we utilize
LLM for preliminary POI selection from the rough location
zone, followed by manual curation to rectify any erroneous
assignments. It is important to note the limitations of GPS-
enabled smartphones, which typically provide accurate lo-
cation data within a 4.9-meter radius under ideal conditions
[24]. However, accuracy diminishes in urban environments
near structures like buildings, bridges, and dense foliage.
To evaluate the model’s performance and robustness against
real-world conditions, we introduce noise at three levels: 5
meters, 10 meters, and 20 meters. The noise, simulated using
a Gaussian kernel, is added to the latitude and longitude
coordinates of the POIs. Subsequent to this augmentation,
our test dataset comprises 362 individuals and 2,007 activi-
ties, consisting of 1,724 mandatory activities and 283 non-
mandatory activities.
C. Result
1) POI Classification: Considering there is a significant
amount of incomplete features in the dataset. For observa-
tions that only have limited features available, such as a POI
with only a name labeled like “V olkswagen”, it’s hard to
indicate whether the individual is there for car purchasing
(category 5), auto maintenance (category 6), or is simply
an employee at the location (category 2). As a result, in
the calculation of overall accuracy and macro F-1 score,
we consider the classification correct if one of the three
predicted activities from the model matches the manually
labeled activity category. Additionally, we calculate the hit
rate for each position of the predicted activity code, recorded
as “Hit@n”. The model returns these codes in decreasing
order of probability, as specified in the prompt.
TABLE II: Performance metrics for POI classification with
different models.
Metric Egypt(gpt3.5) Egypt(gpt4) LA(gpt3.5) LA(gpt4)
Accuracy 90.3% 93.4% 82.5% 91.4%
Hit @1 61.6% 74.7% 65.2% 75.7%
Hit @2 22.6% 9.7% 15.4% 8.7%
Hit @3 6.1% 9.0% 1.9% 7.0%
F-1 Score 91.50% 96.10% 82.1% 92.9%
As shown in Table II, our model achieves a 93.4%
accuracy for the Egypt dataset and 91.4% accuracy for the
LA county dataset, with F-1 scores of 96.10% and 92.9%
respectively using the gpt4 model. This demonstrates its su-
periority and robustness compared with previous approaches.
Compared to gpt3.5, the more advanced gpt4 model out-
performs in both accuracy and F-1 score, especially for
challenging datasets like LA country where more feature
contents are missing. Besides, the analysis of the hit rate
of the three predicted categories shows that while the “Hit
@1” rate dominates when using both models, the “Hit @1”
rate of gpt4 is approximately 10-13% higher than that of
gpt3.5. This improvement underscores the advanced model’s
enhanced comprehension abilities, leading to more robust
performance in classification.
Some instances of the classification results are listed in
Fig. 4. For POI 1, with only the name “KFC”, the model
confidently categorized category 7 (Buy meals) as its first
match with a probability of 0.7, and the semantically related
“buy” category 5 (Buy goods) as the second choice. For
POI 2 with a clear description, the model predicted category
10 (Exercise) as the best match with a 0.7 probability, and
category 9 (Recreational activities) as the next likely category
with a 0.2 probability. In the case of POI 3, a cafe, the
model assigned close probabilities between categories 7 (Buy
meals) and 9 (Recreational), since a cafe usually includes
both the dining and recreational social attributes. For POI 4
and POI 5 whose names were documented in Arabic(“Roman
theater” and “Dr. Rafiq Suleiman’s clinic”), the model suc-
cessfully understood the meaning and labeled them with
corresponding categories. Besides, 14 (Something else) was
chosen as the complementary third choice in all cases above
as there are no other related categories. These impressing
instances again demonstrate the strong comprehension ability
of our approach, offering logically predicted probabilities
that enhance subsequent activity inference tasks.
2) Activity Inference: In evaluating our activity inference
model on the test dataset, we utilize accuracy @1, @2, and
@3 under 5m, 10m, and 20m levels of noise as evaluation
metrics. These metrics measure the model’s performance
in predicting activity types for stay points. Accuracy @1
represents the proportion of stay points where the correct
activity type is the top prediction, while accuracy @2 and @3
indicate the percentages where the correct activity type falls
within the top two and top three predictions, respectively.
Table III provides examples of inference and demonstrate
the probabilities of activity types and possible visiting POIs.
In the example of clear inference, there are two possible POIs
near the stay point in the trajectory data. By comprehensively
considering the probability of categories and the time of
the activity, the model is able to choose ”Buy goods” as
the possible activity category, which is consistent with the
ground truth. Moreover, the probability of this correct cate-
gory is significantly higher than in other cases. In contrast,
in the example of ambiguous inference, the stay point is
located in a commercial area mixed with many shopping and
dining POIs. In such a scenario, the model finds ”Buy goods”
and ”Buy meals” to be very close, making the situation
confusing. The predicted probabilities of ”Buy goods” and
”Buy meals” are very close, leading to a prediction error.
The model, even in ambiguous situations, can still make
reasonable guesses, although in the case shown in the figure,
the second choice is the most accurate inference. Overall, the
model’s inference can have strong distinguishability.
According to Table IV, which outlines the performance
metrics for activity inference under varying levels of noise,
the algorithm maintains a commendable degree of stability
even as the standard deviation (SD) of noise increases.
Specifically, for non-mandatory activities, Acc @3 remains
above 80%, indicating a resilient performance against the
perturbations caused by noise. With a 5-meter standard
deviation in noise, the accuracy at Acc @3 is recorded at
88.4%, which diminishes to 84.2% when the noise level is
increased to 20 meters. This reduction, while notable, is not
drastic, supporting the assertion that the model upholds a
Fig. 4: Example of POIs and classification results from (a) LA county and (b) Egypt.
Fig. 5: Examples of semantic trajectories post-data mining: (a) Activity-annotated stay points in LA. (b) Activity timelines.
stable predictive capability in the face of increasing noise
levels. Particularly with respect to GPS trajectory datasets,
the model demonstrates robust inference capabilities at a 5-
meter noise accuracy. These findings not only validate the
stability of the model but also highlight its potential for
effective deployment in real-world scenarios where varying
degrees of GPS accuracy are a common occurrence.
As shown in Table V, the results indicate that mandatory
activities (categories 1-3) exhibit consistent performance
due to the deterministic nature of their patterns. On the
other hand, activities characterized by more complex and
variable patterns present greater challenges for prediction.
Despite this, categories 4, 5, 7, 8, 12, and 13 demonstrate
commendable accuracy. Notably, categories such as 5 (Buy
goods), 12 (Health care), and 13 (Religious activities) show
robust performance, which can be attributed to the ample
instances available within the test dataset.
Conversely, activities like 11 (Visit friends), 14 (Some-
thing else), and 15 (Drop off/Pick up) prove to be more
elusive in the context of stay point detection. These activities
are less associated with consistent POIs and often fall into
the ambiguous situation as shown in Table III, leading to
relatively poorer performance. This suggests that a rule-based
algorithm is effective for activities with clear-cut patterns.
Finally, the outcome of the proposed framework is the
semantic trajectory, as illustrated in Fig. 5, where each stay
point in a trajectory is annotated with the most likely activity.
For instance, as shown in Fig. 5 (a), individuals may engage
in activities such as commuting between their home and
work locations, exercising in the morning, or purchasing
goods while en route from work to home. By augmenting
stay point data with activity type information, we enhance
our understanding of human travel mobility and behavior
patterns. Through extensive trajectory mining, we progress
from raw GPS data (aggregated to stay points) to refined
activity chains, marking a significant advancement in the
study of human travel behaviors.
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our study has introduced a novel LLM-based framework
for POI classification and activity inference, demonstrating
notable improvements over traditional learning-based meth-
ods in handling incomplete and varied datasets like those
from OpenStreetMap. Our approach, by leveraging the robust
inferential capabilities of large language models, has shown
exceptional performance with high accuracy and F-1 scores
TABLE III: Conditional Probability of POI-Activity Combi-
nation for a Stay Point*
An example of Clear Inference
Activity for POI A1 A2 A3
POI 1 (3.2m)** 0.424
(Buy goods)
0.167
(Buy services)
0.055
(Something else)
POI 2 (4.8m) 0.214
(Buy meals)
0.090
(General errands)
0.047
(Something else)
An example of Ambiguous Inference
Activity for POI A1 A2 A3
POI 1 (3.3m) 0.170
(Buy goods)
0.084
(Buy services)
0.029
(Something else)
POI 2 (3.4m) 0.169
(Buy meals)
0.040
(Buy goods)
0.012
(Recreation)
POI 3 (3.4m) 0.182
(Buy goods)
0.052
(Buy services)
0.024
(Recreation)
POI 4 (4.2m) 0.208
(Buy meals)
0.024
(Recreation)
0
(Buy goods)
* The activity inference algorithm identifies the most likely
visited POI within a specified range, accounting for noise and
multiple POIs, to determine the final activity type.
** Distance between the POI and the stay point.
TABLE IV: Performance metrics for non-mandatory activity
inference under different levels of noise
SD of noise Type Acc @1 Type Acc @2 Type Acc @3
5m 75.0% 84.1% 88.4%
10m 73.6% 81.8% 85.3%
20m 71.9% 80.5% 84.2%
in real-world scenarios across diverse geographic locations.
Looking ahead, we aim to enhance the accuracy and robust-
ness of POI classification methods with more sophisticated
prompt engineering or the development of a fine-tuned LLM
designed specifically for the POI classification task.
VI. A CKNOWLEDGEMENT
We want to thank Xiangnan Zhang and Zhaoyi Ye for their
contribution to dataset preprocessing.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Petrillo and S. Santini, “Editorial special section on coordination,
cooperation, and control of autonomous vehicles in smart connected
road environments,” IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 5, pp. 202–204, 2024.
[2] L. Kessler and K. Bogenberger, “Detection rate of congestion patterns
comparing multiple traffic sensor technologies,” IEEE Open Journal
of Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 5, pp. 29–40, 2024.
[3] R. Chen, J. Ning, Y . Lei, Y . Hui, and N. Cheng, “Mixed traffic flow
state detection: A connected vehicles-assisted roadside radar and video
data fusion scheme,” IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 4, pp. 360–371, 2023.
[4] J. Ugan, M. Abdel-Aty, and Z. Islam, “Using connected vehicle
trajectory data to evaluate the effects of speeding,” IEEE Open Journal
of Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 5, pp. 16–28, 2024.
[5] C. Pasquaretta, T. Dubois, T. Gomez-Moracho, V . P. Delepoulle,
G. Le Loc’h, P. Heeb, and M. Lihoreau, “Analysis of temporal patterns
in animal movement networks,” Methods in Ecology and Evolution ,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 101–113, 2021.
[6] G. Salierno, L. Leonardi, and G. Cabri, “A big data architecture for
digital twin creation of railway signals based on synthetic data,” IEEE
Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 5, 2024.
[7] L. Shen and P. R. Stopher, “Review of gps travel survey and gps
data-processing methods,” Transport reviews, vol. 34, no. 3, 2014.
[8] J. Teusch, J. N. Gremmel, C. Koetsier, F. T. Johora, M. Sester, D. M.
Woisetschl¨ager, and J. P. M ¨uller, “A systematic literature review on
machine learning in shared mobility,”IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 4, pp. 870–899, 2023.
TABLE V: Performance metrics for activity inference under
5m noise for different activity types
Types Acc@1 F1 score Types Acc@1 F1 score
1 98.3% 98.3% 9 63.1% 74.2%
2 87.2% 95.1% 10 64.7% 76.1%
3 90.0% 95.0% 11 52.2% 67.3%
4 100% 98.3% 12 100% 97.2%
5 78.5% 76.3% 13 100% 100%
6 66.7% 76.2% 14 46.2% 67.2%
7 77.4% 87.1% 15 50.1% 70.6%
8 100% 96.6% Average 91.7% 92.3%
[9] M. Ruta, F. Scioscia, S. Ieva, G. Loseto, and E. Di Sciascio, “Semantic
annotation of openstreetmap points of interest for mobile discovery
and navigation,” in 2012 IEEE First International Conference on
Mobile Services. IEEE, 2012, pp. 33–39.
[10] E. Thonhofer, S. Sigl, M. Fischer, F. Heuer, A. Kuhn, J. Erhart,
M. Harrer, and W. Schildorfer, “Infrastructure-based digital twins for
cooperative, connected, automated driving and smart road services,”
IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems , 2023.
[11] M. Haklay and P. Weber, “Openstreetmap: User-generated street
maps,” IEEE Pervasive computing, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 12–18, 2008.
[12] S. J. Choi, H. J. Song, S. B. Park, and S. J. Lee, “A poi categorization
by composition of onomastic and contextual information,” in 2014
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint Conferences on Web Intelligence
(WI) and Intelligent Agent Technologies (IAT) , vol. 2. IEEE, 2014.
[13] C. Zhou, H. Yang, J. Zhao, and X. Zhang, “Poi classification method
based on feature extension and deep learning,” Journal of Advanced
Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics , vol. 24, 2020.
[14] V . Milias and A. Psyllidis, “Assessing the influence of point-of-
interest features on the classification of place categories,” Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems , vol. 86, p. 101597, 2021.
[15] W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y . Hou, Y . Min,
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong, Y . Du, C. Yang, Y . Chen, Z. Chen,
J. Jiang, R. Ren, Y . Li, X. Tang, Z. Liu, P. Liu, J.-Y . Nie, and J.-R.
Wen, “A survey of large language models,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.18223
[16] T. Bhattacharya, L. Kulik, and J. Bailey, “Automatically recognizing
places of interest from unreliable GPS data using spatio-temporal
density estimation and line intersections,” Pervasive and Mobile Com-
puting, vol. 19, pp. 86–107, 2015.
[17] D. V . Cuong, V . M. Ngo, P. Cappellari, and M. Roantree, “Analyzing
shared bike usage through graph-based spatio-temporal modeling,”
IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 5, 2024.
[18] L. Alexander, S. Jiang, M. Murga, and M. C. Gonz ´alez, “Ori-
gin–destination trips by purpose and time of day inferred from mobile
phone data,” Transportation Research Part C, vol. 58, 2015.
[19] X. Liu, M. Wu, B. Peng, and Q. Huang, “Graph-based representa-
tion for identifying individual travel activities with spatiotemporal
trajectories and poi data,” Scientific Reports , 2023, published on
www.nature.com/scientificreports.
[20] C. Meng, Y . Cui, Q. He, L. Su, and J. Gao, “Travel purpose inference
with gps trajectories, pois, and geo-tagged social media data,” in 2017
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BIGDATA) , 2017.
[21] S. Jiang, Y . Yang, S. Gupta et al., “The timegeo modeling framework
for urban mobility without travel surveys,”Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences , vol. 113, no. 37, pp. E5370–E5378, 2016.
[22] M. Gruteser and D. Grunwald, “Anonymous usage of location-based
services through spatial and temporal cloaking,” in Proceedings of the
1st International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services (MobiSys), 2003, pp. 31–42.
[23] National Renewable Energy Laboratory, “Transportation Secure
Data Center,” Accessed Jan. 15, 2019, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nrel.gov/tsdc
[24] U.S. Department of Defense, “GPS standard positioning service (SPS)
performance standard,” April 2020, 5th Edition.