What the flock knows that the birds do not: exploring the
emergence of joint agency in multi-agent active inference
Domenico Maisto, Davide Nuzzi, Giovanni Pezzulo∗
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy
∗Corresponding author: giovanni.pezzulo@istc.cnr.it
November 17, 2025
Abstract
Collective behavior pervades biological systems, from flocks of birds to neural assemblies and
human societies. Yet, how such collectives acquire functional properties—such as joint agency or
knowledge—that transcend those of their individual components remains an open question. Here,
we combine active inference and information-theoretic analyses to explore how a minimal system
of interacting agents can give rise to joint agency and collective knowledge. We model flocking dy-
namics using multiple active inference agents, each minimizing its own free energy while coupling
reciprocally with its neighbors. We show that as agents self-organize, their interactions define
higher-order statistical boundaries (Markov blankets) enclosing a “flock” that can be treated as
an emergent agent with its own sensory, active, and internal states. When exposed to exter-
nal perturbations (a “predator”), the flock exhibits faster, coordinated responses than individual
agents, reflecting collective sensitivity to environmental change. Crucially, analyses of synergistic
information reveal that the flock encodes information about the predator’s location that is not
accessible to every individual bird, demonstrating implicit collective knowledge. Together, these
results show how informational coupling among active inference agents can generate new levels
of autonomy and inference, providing a framework for understanding the emergence of (implicit)
collective knowledge and joint agency.
Keywords:joint agency; active inference; multi-agent systems; flocks; synergistic information
1 Introduction
The anchor of all my dreams is the collective wisdom of mankind as a whole. –Nelson
Mandela
The fundamental unit of analysis in biology and cognition is often theagent—an entity, such as a
person, animal, or even a single neuron or cell, that possesses a well-defined boundary and some degree
ofagency, that is, autonomy in perceiving and interacting with an environment. However, many of the
most intriguing phenomena in biological and cognitive systems emerge not from isolated agents but
from the collective dynamics of multiple interacting ones. Examples include the coordinated behaviors
and self-organization of cells composing a body morphology [49, 23, 67, 52, 54]neural population
dynamics underlying brain function [18, 26, 21, 13, 38], the collective behaviors animals [42, 47, 80],
distributed models of mind [57, 41], and even human societies viewed as collective agents [74]. Such
collective intelligencephenomena occur across multiple scales of biological and cognitive organization
[56].
These examples suggest that the concept of agency can be generalized beyond single individuals or
parts, extending to systems composed of many interacting components that together behaveas ifthey
were one agent. If agency is defined as the capacity to sense, infer, and act purposefully, thenjoint
agency(also calledsharedorcollective agency) arises when perception, cognition, and action extend
beyond a single entity—emerging instead from the coordinated dynamics of multiple decision-making
units.
1
arXiv:2511.10835v1  [nlin.AO]  13 Nov 2025
Notions of joint agency appear at many levels of organization and cognitive sophistication. At the
level of human social behavior, classical theories of social cognition emphasize both social interaction
and collective behavior: while individuals act autonomously, they also participate in shared social
structures. Theories ofmentalizinghighlight that agents form beliefs about, and models of, other
agents’ minds [25]. Complementary accounts emphasizeshared and aligned representations, in which
multiple agents maintain overlapping internal models of their environment [66]. In these frameworks,
joint agency corresponds to phenomena such as shared representations [75, 76], collective intentions and
goals [5, 6, 82], joint commitments [31], common ground [10], joint payoffs and team reasoning [79], and
“we-representations” of action and intention [28]. Empirical work in cognitive neuroscience supports
these views, identifying mechanisms such asneural coupling[36, 35, 55, 44],mirroring[27, 71] and
sensorimotor communication[64] as enabling the fine-grained spatiotemporal coordination required
for joint action. Subjectively, such coordination can give rise to ashared sense of agency—the feeling
that outcomes were causedtogether[59].
Computational models have begun to formalize these social dynamics in terms of interacting agents
that communicate, coordinate, and collaborate toward shared objectives. These frameworks typically
assume internal (generative) models that encode distinctions between self and others—“my,” “your,”
and “our” actions and intentions [84, 45]. More recent approaches, however, exploreinteractivedy-
namics in which multiple agents maintain and update ashared world modelto minimize prediction
errors toward a common goal [19, 53, 24]. Related concepts include the notion ofagent-neutralmodels,
or internal models that predict the collective consequences of joint actions regardless of who executed
them [65, 66], andshared beliefssuch as “public beliefs” [16] or the “imagined we” [81], where collective
cognitive dimensions (e.g., beliefs, plans, agency)—shared across multiple individuals—supersede and
drive individual cognitive states.
Here we are concerned with a more primitive notion of joint agency that arises at lower levels of
organization: at the level of collective behavior and self-organization among simple, particle-like agents
that lack advanced cognitive abilities and rich internal models incorporating notions like “our beliefs”
or “our plans”. This primitive form of joint agency emerges from the simple fact that teams of agents
can infer their own states and actions based on those of other, surrounding agents to which they are
informationally coupled—and they are capable of making collective decisions [12, 78]. There is a long
tradition of studying the self-organization of collectives, such as active particles, animal swarms, and
robot ensembles, using methods from statistical physics and information theory [14, 4, 7, 2, 32, 1].
Complementary approaches have also been developed to quantifycausal emergenceand the extent to
which higher-level collective dynamics exhibit causal power beyond that of their individual components
[40, 72].
An emerging trend is the study of collective phenomena and multi-agent systems within the active
inference framework [61, 19, 53, 37, 48, 3, 73]. Active inference was initially developed to address the
cognitive and neural processes associated with isolated biological organisms and their action-perception
cycle. The general idea was that a single imperative or objective function — the minimization of
variational free energy — suffices to explain both perception and action and their associated neural
dynamics in biological organisms.
Recent developments have extended active inference principles to the collective dynamics of multiple
agents, simpler (e.g., active particles) or more complex. The main difference between active inference
and typical statistical approaches used to study collective phenomena is that each component is a full-
fledged agent, with its action-perception cycle and minimizing its free energy based on local signals from
the environment and/or other agents. For instance, in a network of agents playing the role of “neurons,”
each minimizing its own variational free energy, a single neuron can infer whether or not to fire based
on the activity of surrounding neurons. The ensemble of neurons can thereby exhibit synchronous
dynamics and become collectively responsive to perceptual stimuli and reward contingencies [60, 29, 30].
Similarly, in a collection of cells engaged in morphogenesis and pattern formation, each cell can infer its
own position in the final body morphology from the chemical signals emitted by neighboring cells, while
simultaneously emitting signals that guide others [23]. Functionally, each cell acts as an individual
active inference agent minimizing its own free energy, yet its collective dynamics lead to the emergence
of a coherent body morphology that is resilient—for example, capable of reconstructing itself after
perturbation.
When endowed with joint agency, active inference agents do not lose their individual autonomy:
each continues to infer and minimize its own free energy. However, their collective agency at the
2
system level supersedes individual agency to some extent, as the fate of each agent becomes jointly
determined by the states and signals of others [37]. This formulation allows studying agency at two
(or more) nested levels: the level of the single agent and the agent collective (and of a collective
composed of collectives, and so on). The formulation also allows studying how collective processes can
go awry, for example, when a single agent becomes insensitive to signals from other agents and hence
myopically pursues individual rather than collective goals. In this perspective, a breakdown of cell-cell
communication that causes individual cells to prioritize unicellular objectives rather than large-scale,
collective morphogenetic goals has been proposed as a possible mechanism for cancer [50, 51].
Despite significant progress in modeling the collective behavior of multiple (simple) active inference
agents, the relationships between these models and the broader notions of joint agency remain only par-
tially understood. Previous active inference simulations have primarily focused on the self-organization
of agents into cohesive multi-agent structures—such as bodies or coordinated ensembles—but have paid
less attention to the functional consequences of this self-organization for higher-order phenomena such
asjoint agencyorcollective beliefs. These functional notions are typically not explicitly encoded in
the internal generative models of the simulated agents, unlike in active inference models of higher-level
cognition (e.g., human–human joint action [53]), where such constructs are explicitly represented.
This raises an important question: can a collective system, even in the absence of explicit cognitive
representations, be said to possess a form of knowledge or operational capability that extends beyond
that of its individual components? In other words, can the ensemble as a whole instantiate acollective
world model—a functional integration of information and inference processes that confers emergent,
joint agency?
To address these questions, we present and analyze a simple self-organizing multi-agent simulation
inspired by flocking dynamics, in which each “bird” is modeled as an active inference agent minimizing
its own variational free energy. In this framework, each bird updates its beliefs about hidden states
(e.g., its heading direction) based on local observations and acts to minimize prediction error, leading
to emergent coordination as birds gradually align their trajectories over time.
We first illustrate how a formal notion of both individual agency (of the birds) and joint agency
(of the flock) can be derived within this setting, using the concept of aMarkov blanketto delineate
the statistical boundaries between agents, their interactions, and the environment. We then present
simulations in which a “predator” is introduced to perturb and destabilize the flock, allowing us to
examine two distinct phases: one in which the flock exhibits joint agency, and another in which it
does not. This minimal model allows us to visualize the transition from individual to joint agency
(in the absence of perturbations) and its dissolution under external disruption (when the predator
attacks). It thereby demonstrates how birds can dynamically merge into, or separate from, a collective
agent—aflock—through changing patterns of coupling and inference. Finally, we employsynergistic
information—a quantitative measure of how information is distributed and integrated across multiple
components—to assess the extent to which the collective flock possesses implicit “knowledge about”
the predator’s position that exceeds the information explicitly represented in the internal models of
individual birds. This approach enables us to characterize the emergence of system-level inference
and coordination, offering a formal bridge between information-theoretic and dynamical notions of
collective and joint agency.
2 Formalizing individual and joint agency in flocking behavior
through Markov blankets
We develop a simulation of flocking behavior, in which we consider an ensemble of 100 active inference
agents (”birds”), each endowed with identical internal models and each minimizing its local variational
free energy. To infer its heading direction, each bird uses observations about the heading directions of its
neighbors. This simple mechanism promotes the self-organization of the birds into a collective flocking
behavior. It is analogous to models in statistical physics [85] and flocking simulations in computer
graphics [70], but it is based on local inference rather than on predefined rules (see Section A for a
formal specification of the active inference agents).
Figure 1A illustrates 8 consecutive time steps of an example simulation of flocking behavior among
100 birds, with the colors and orientations of the inset (bird) images indicating each bird’s current
heading direction. The simulation shows the gradual alignment of the birds’ headings over time.
3
a) t = 1
 t = 2
 t = 3
 t = 4
t = 5
 t = 6
 t = 7
 t = 8
b)
 c)
d)
Agent type
Internal
External
Active
Sensory
Figure 1:Formalizing individual and joint agency in flocking behavior through Markov
blankets(a) Example simulation of flocking behavior among 100 birds over 8 time steps, showing
the gradual alignment of headings. (b) Markov blankets, individual and joint agency. Schematic
representation of an individual agent, whose internal states are separated from the external environment
by a Markov blanket (dashed line). The blanket mediates the exchange of information through sensory
sand activeastates, defining the agent’s boundary for perception and action. (c) Illustration of a
group of interacting agents whose collective dynamics are enclosed within a higher-level Markov blanket
(dashed line). Through reciprocal coupling and shared information flow, the ensemble functions as a
single, higher-order agent (’flock’), exemplifying the emergence of joint or shared agency from multiple
interacting components. (d) The emergent Markov blanket around the flock during time steps 1–6
of the simulation in (a). Colors illustrate the statistical roles of individual birds relative to the flock
Markov Blanket: internal (blue), active (red), and sensory (magenta). External states are depicted as
cyan birds.
4
To assess whether this alignment can be formalized as a transition toward joint agency—namely,
from individual birds to aflock—we turn to the notion of (nested)Markov blankets[46, 62, 22]. A
Markov blanket defines a statistical boundary around an agent, delineating the interface between its
internal states and the external environment—and thereby its domain of perception and action [63]
(Figure 1B). It is based on the notion ofstatistical independence: internal and external states are
conditionally independent given a set ofblanket states, typically partitioned into sensory and active
states. Sensory states mediate the flow of information from the environment to the internal states
(observations), while active states mediate the influence of internal dynamics on the environment
(actions). This statistical separation enables an agent to maintain its identity and autonomy by
inferring hidden causes in the environment from its sensory inputs, and by acting to minimize the
discrepancy between predicted and observed states.
Crucially, the Markov blanket formalism allows forhierarchical nestingof agents and collectives.
When multiple agents become sufficiently coupled through reciprocal sensory and active exchanges,
their collective dynamics can give rise to a higher-level Markov blanket encompassing the group as a
whole (Figure 1C). In this configuration, some of the individual agents’ states function as the internal,
sensory, and active components of a superordinate blanket, thereby defining a new, emergent agent.
Thus, while each agent retains its individual agency, the group simultaneously acquires a higher-
level, joint agency. Such nesting provides a principled, statistical account of how joint agency can
arise naturally from the interactions of individual agents: as informational boundaries reorganize, new
levels of autonomy and coordinated inference emerge [20, 37].
Figure 1D shows the Markov blanket around a collective of birds—which we henceforth call aflock—
that emerges over time steps 1–6 of the simulation. The colors illustrate that individual birds play
distinct roles in the flock, serving as internal (blue), active (red), and sensory (magenta) states, whereas
the remaining birds (cyan) constitute external states outside the Markov blanket. This visualization
demonstrates that, during the simulation, a statistical separation emerges between birds that are part of
the flock and those that are not, thereby providing a formal characterization of joint agency in the flock.
Our simulations further demonstrate that the flock preserves certain macroscopic characteristics—such
as its overall direction and approximate shape—even as its precise boundaries fluctuate over time.
Summing up, we have shown that the notion of Markov blanket provides a principled way to
formalize the emergence of a collective agent (the flock) above and beyond the individual agents (the
birds). The flock can thus be ascribed a form of (joint) agency, grounded in the statistical separation
(or autonomy) of its internal states from external states, and in the mediating roles of sensory and
active states that couple the two. At the same time, the joint agency of the flock does not diminish the
individual agency of its constituent birds, which continue to infer and minimize their own free energy
autonomously. These two levels of autonomy, therefore, coexist and are hierarchically nested within
one another.
3 Sensing and escaping predators in the flock
Having defined the notion of joint agency in a flock, we now assess to what extent the flock can “sense”
and “react to” external perturbations. To this end, we extend the flocking simulation by introducing
a “predator” that appears at two distinct random positions at time steps 5 and 35, and disappears at
the following time step. The predator destabilizes the flock: all birds that sense the predator enter
a “stress” state that compels them to escape by moving in random directions. Furthermore, this
stress state propagates to neighboring birds, causing them also to move randomly and triggering a fast
cascade that destabilizes the entire flock.
This simulation allows us to compare the effects of the predator at two stages: an early stage (step
5), before the birds have self-organized into a large flock, and a later stage (step 35), when a large,
cohesive flock has already formed.
Figure 2 shows the results of 500 simulations, each lasting 60 time steps, in which the predator
appears at random positions. We excluded from the analysis and the plots 32 simulations where the
agents’ ’stress’ state, induced by the first predator, had not fully returned to baseline before the arrival
of the second predator. Figure 2A displays four configurations, before and after the predator appears
at time steps 5 and 35, in one representative simulation. It permits visually appreciating that the birds
are more organized before the second appearance of the predator and that in both cases, the predator
’destablizes’ the system.
5
a) t = 5
 t = 10
t = 35
 t = 40
3
4
5
6
7Energy
b)
10 20 30 40 50 60
Time
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4Stress
c)
Figure 2:Sensing and escaping predators in the flock.(a) Example of four configurations from
a single simulation run. A predator (indicated by a white bird) arrives at time stepst= 5 andt= 35,
at two distinct, random locations. Configurations are also shown 5 steps following each arrival (t= 10
andt= 40). White birds are shown in the plots for illustrative purposes only; they are not part of the
simulation except at time stepst= 5 andt= 35. (b) System energy, representing the global degree of
alignment among agents. The dashed lines show the arrival times of the first (red) and second (blue)
predators. The gray band indicates the interquartile range across all simulations. (c) Agents’ average
stress state over time. The dashed lines show the arrival times of the first (red) and second (blue)
predators. The gray band indicates the interquartile range across all simulations. See the main text
for further explanation.
Figure 2B shows the energy of the system, defined as in the vector Potts model with four states and
Moore neighborhood [85], which characterizes the average degree of alignment among the birds (and
thus approximates the size or coherence of the flock). When the predator appears at an early stage (red
dotted line), the energy continues to increase briefly before decreasing, indicating that disorganization
occurs with some delay. In contrast, when the predator appears later (blue dotted line), the energy is
initially much higher due to the presence of an already well-formed flock; here, the decrease in energy
occurs more rapidly, reflecting a faster predator-induced destabilization.
Figure 2C shows the dynamics of the “stress” state across birds, which—as expected—increase
sharply when the predator appears and then gradually decline. This pattern is expected, since the
stress propagation is designed to be independent of the agents’ current states.
Summing up, this simulation illustrates that predator-induced destabilization occurs faster the
second time the predator appears, when a larger flock is present. This occurs despite the propagation
mechanism of the “stress” state being identical in both cases (Figure 2C). The faster response of
the flock may indicate more efficient information propagation within the collective, a hypothesis we
investigate in the next analysis.
4 Synergistic information about predator location in the flock
In this analysis, we turn to our central question: can we identify a notion of collective knowledge in
the flock that extends beyond that of its individual agents?
Specifically, we assess whether the flock as a whole carries information about the predator’s loca-
tion that individual birds do not possess—and whether this information is greater during the second
6
appearance of the predator (at time step 35, when a larger flock is present) than during the first (at
time step 5, when the birds are still close to a random configuration).
To quantify this, we employpartial information decomposition(PID) [83], an information-theoretic
framework that measures how two source variables (e.g., a pair of birds) together provide information
about a target variable (e.g., the location of the predator). Crucially, PID decomposes total mutual
information into three components: theunique informationprovided by each source individually, the
redundant informationshared between them, and thesynergistic informationthat emerges only when
both sources are considered jointly. Synergistic information has been proposed as a foundation for
formalizingemergence, capturing higher-level informational structure beyond the sum of individual
contributions [72].
We compute all four PID atoms across all pairs of birds (source variables) and for each of the
two predator locations (target variable), over all 60 time steps and 1000 simulation runs. In each
simulation, the predator appears at two distinct random positions. To reduce the dimensionality of
the target variable and mitigate estimation bias, we coarse-grained the predator’s 10×10 grid location
to a 2×2 grid. This results in four large, dynamically equivalent quadrants, which remain uniformly
sampled by the predator. This coarse-graining ensures that any detected information about the target’s
location must be dynamically encoded by the agents, rather than stemming from static, pre-existing
properties of the environment (e.g., center-vs-edge effects).
Figure 3 summarizes these results. The core concepts of PID, including unique information, re-
dundancy, and synergy, are conceptually illustrated in Figure 3A. Figure 3B summarizes the temporal
dynamics of all four PID atoms, averaged across all bird pairs. Notably, the unique information atoms
(top panels) and the redundancy atom (bottom left panel) remain comparable to zero, falling within
the gray band of the null distribution at all time steps. In sharp contrast, the synergy atom (bottom
right panel) is the only variable that shows significant values. Specifically, we observe a significant
peak in synergistic information for the second predator appearance (blue curve). In contrast, the
synergy related to the first predator (red curve) shows a similar temporal shape (a peak, decline, and
rebound), but it falls within the null distribution band and is therefore not statistically significant.
The significant synergy (blue curve) peaks shortly after the predator’s appearance and then declines,
with a smaller rebound thereafter.
The impact of spatial separation (measured using Chebyshev distance) on the synergy is further
detailed in Figure 3C. For pairs in close proximity (Distance = 1, left panel), significant synergy is
detected for both the first (red curve) and second (blue curve) predator appearances. As the distance
increases (Distance = 3 and Distance = 5, middle panels), the synergy for the first predator becomes
non-significant, while the synergy for the second predator remains robustly above the null distribution.
At the longest distance shown (Distance = 7, right panel), synergy becomes non-significant for both
events. In all cases, the synergy is higher for the second predator than for the first.
Summing up, this analysis reveals that the flock exhibits synergistic information about the preda-
tor’s location, and that this information is stronger and more spatially distributed during the second
predator event, when a larger flock is present. This finding illustrates a form ofcollective knowledge
that extends beyond the information available to individual birds, and may help explain the faster
collective response observed during the second predator encounter. It also points toward a notion of
causal emergence, supported by the presence of synergistic information [72].
5 Discussion
Many of the most fascinating phenomena in biology arise from the self-organization and coordinated
behavior of simple agents—cells, neurons, animals, humans, and beyond. Such collective dynamics
have been studied across multiple scales, from high-level cognitive constructs such as shared goals and
plans, to low-level collective phenomena mediated by reciprocal interactions among simple agents that
lack explicit representations of “you,” “we,” or other higher-level cognitive concepts.
In this work, we have explored the notion ofjoint agencyin a minimal setting: a population of active
inference agents (birds), each minimizing its own free energy while remaining informationally coupled
with others. Through simulations of collective self-organization in flocking behavior, we examined
three interconnected questions.
In the first analysis, we used the concept of (nested)Markov blanketsto formalize how agency
can extend beyond individual active inference agents to groups of agents—that is, from birds to
7
Unique 1 Unique 2
Synergy
Redundancy
a)
0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
b) Unique 1
0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
Unique 2
20 40 60
Time
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
Redundancy
20 40 60
Time
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Synergy
20 40 60
Time
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
c) Distance = 1
Predator 1
Predator 2
First predator time
Second predator time
20 40 60
Time
Distance = 3
20 40 60
Time
Distance = 5
20 40 60
Time
Distance = 7
Figure 3:Synergistic information about predator location in the flock.(a) Partial Information
Decomposition (PID) of the mutual information between two source variables (agent states,X 1 and
X2, black birds) and a target variable (predator position, in one of four 5×5 quadrants,Y, white bird).
The blue and red ellipses delineate the contribution ofX 1 andX 2, respectively, while the green circle
shows the combined contribution. The total information is partitioned into the four unique atoms:
redundancy(the purple overlap) represents information available from both sources,synergyrepresents
information available only when both sources are considered together (outside the ellipses), andunique
informationrepresents information available from only one source. (b) Temporal dynamics of the four
PID atoms: unique information from the first (top left) and second (top right) agent in each pair,
redundancy (bottom left), and synergy (bottom right). Each atom is averaged over 1000 simulations
and all 4950 pairs of agents. The red curve shows the case where the target is the position of the first
predator, and the blue curve shows the case where the target is the position of the second predator.
Vertical dashed lines indicate the arrival times of the predators. The gray band represents the 5th to
95th percentile of the null distribution, obtained by 500 random permutations of the target variable.
(c) Temporal dynamics of the synergy as a function of the spatial distance between agent pairs. Each
panel shows the dynamics, mediated across the same 1000 simulations, calculated only for agent pairs
separated by a specific Chebyshev distanceD= 1,3,5,7 (from left to right). The figure conventions
(red/blue curves for predator targets, vertical dashed lines for arrival times, and gray band for the null
distribution derived from target permutations) are identical to those in (b).
8
flocks. We showed that during flocking, the Markov blanket, which formalizes a statistical boundary
around an agent, can expand to enclose a set of birds forming a collective unit. Within the flock,
subsets of birds play the roles of internal, sensory, and active states of a collective Markov blanket,
while others constitute external states. This analysis extends prior work on collective, multi-agent
systems—including groups of neurons [60], collections of primordial cells [20], and developing tissues
[23]—by showing that the notion of the Markov blanket can account for situations in which each
agent retains its individual autonomy, while the collective simultaneously acquires a higher-level, joint
agency. From this perspective, agency is not a fixed attribute of individual systems but an emergent
property of coupled dynamics that maintain conditional independence from their surroundings. As
interactions among agents strengthen, the boundaries that define “self” can expand or contract, giving
rise to transient or stable forms of joint agency. This provides a unified statistical and dynamical
framework for understanding how perception, action, and decision-making scale from individuals to
collectives—from neurons forming neural assemblies to organisms forming social or ecological systems.
In the second and third analyses, we asked whether being endowed with joint agency—that is,
forming a flock—confers additional capabilities or knowledge compared to individual agents. To this
end, we introduced a “predator” that appeared at random positions during both early stages of self-
organization (when no flock or only a small flock was present) and later stages (when a large flock had
formed). The predator destabilized the system by triggering a “stress” state that caused nearby birds
to reorient randomly, propagating disruption through the flock.
The simulations revealed that larger flocks reacted more rapidly to the predator, as indicated by a
faster onset of destabilization during later stages, even though the rules governing the propagation of
“stress” did not depend on the level of organization.
Most importantly, our results show that the flock as a whole possessessynergistic information
about the predator’s location, and that this information increases with flock size and extends farther
from the predator. This suggests a formally grounded—albeit implicit—notion of collective knowledge
(or shared world model) that goes beyond the information available to individual birds.
Summing up, our simulations illustrate a simple yet general method to characterize a collective
agent, such as a flock, as an entity that maintains statistical separation from its environment through
a Markov blanket, and exhibits knowledge beyond its components through synergistic information.
More broadly, these results illustrate how collective entities can extend the spatial and temporal reach
of perception, cognition, and action—or theircognitive light cone[49]—beyond the boundaries of any
single agent.
There is, however, a conceptual distinction between the implicit form of collective knowledge re-
vealed by synergistic information and the explicit forms typically studied in cognitive science. In
cognitive and social sciences, collective knowledge is often assumed to rely on explicit internal models
of others’ mental states or shared epistemic representations (e.g., “common ground” or “what we all
know that we know”). Similarly, our simulations demonstrate collective sensing and action that do
not depend on such explicit representations but instead arise from simple interaction rules. In human
societies, collective action is often defined by intentionality—individuals actwith the goalof produc-
ing collective outcomes. By contrast, in simpler biological systems, such as morphogenesis or pattern
formation, intentionality can be replaced by teleological organization: systems are structured in such
a way to produce collective outcomes even without explicit goals.
An open question, then, is how to bridge our minimal notion of joint agency with more sophisticated
accounts used in cognitive science. A natural starting point is thegood regulator theorem[11], which
states that any effective controller must embody a model of the system it regulates. The multi-agent
systems we described do nothavea model of their collective behavior; rather, they collectivelyare
orbecomea model of social action through their pattern of couplings. More complex agents, by
contrast, possess explicit internal models of collective behavior, with shared representations, goals,
and intentions. Understanding how living systems evolve frombeingtohavinga model may shed light
on the developmental and evolutionary origins of collective cognition.
Finally, this perspective invites consideration of agency at even broader spatial and temporal scales,
such as inniche construction[69]. Extending these ideas across generations and cultural dynamics
raises deeper questions [68, 9, 24]: To what extent are our minds shaped by social dynamics? How
far do our Markov blankets extend to encompass others? Are our generative models so profoundly
influenced by social and cultural processes that purely individual agency becomes impossible to isolate?
And does the fact that knowledge is distributed across people, artifacts, and institutions—books, tools,
9
and the internet—render minds inherently socially extended and embedded by design? We leave these
questions open for future research.
A Supplementary materials
A.1 Active inference framework
In this work, we consider birds as Bayesian agents with sensory, active, and internal states that are
updated according to the Active Inference principles [61]. Active inference (AIF) is a theoretical
framework that provides a unified account of perception, action, and learning of both living and
artificial systems. It posits that an agent’s behavior can be understood as the process of maximizing
the evidence for the implicit statistical model of the world it embodies, in response to the sensory
information flow, by selecting adaptive sequences of actions.
This process is formally grounded in the free-energy principle, according to which, given a physical
phenomenon namedgenerative process, minimizing a quantity known as variational free-energy corre-
sponds to optimizing the upper bound on the measure of how much thegenerative modelused by the
agent to describe the phenomenon diverges from the generative process in its predictions.
Following the AIF framework, we designed a generative model describing a single bird that, through
local interactions, determines the emergence of flocking behaviors.
We adopted a hybrid modeling approach. We borrowed the Potts model [85], a statistical physics
model describing spin glasses in which spins are arranged on alattice, a periodic graph, and combined
it with the computational model developed by Reynolds to mimic collective behaviors in computer
vision applications [70].
The Potts model is a generalization of the Ising model [43] forq >2 components. It has been used
to address numerous problems in collective behavior, which are often described as instances of lattice
statistics. Indeed, replacing continuous symmetry with discrete symmetry allows for a simpler, more
tractable understanding of the flocking transition. Recently, Solon and Tailleur argued that flocking
can be described as a transition from a disordered phase to a polar-ordered phase in an active Ising
model, in which spins both diffuse and align on the lattice, a coarse-grained representation of the
space [77]. [8] studied a square lattice in which active particles have four internal states corresponding
to the four directions of motion. A local alignment rule inspired by the ferromagnetic 4-state Potts
model, combined with self-propulsion via biased diffusion based on the internal particle states, leads
to flocking at high densities and low noise.
In contrast, Reynolds introduced a set of prescriptions to force group coordination among multiple
agents to simulate herds and swarms. Essentially, Reynolds’ rules require each agent to:
1. Attempt to stay close to nearby agent (flock centering);
2. Avoid collisions with nearby agent (collision avoidance);
3. Attempt to match velocity with a nearby agent (velocity matching).
These three rules have a heuristic nature and were conceived to respectively promote cohesion, sepa-
ration, and alignment of agents known asboids– a compound noun with “bird” and the suffix “oids”
(this latter meaning “having the likeness of”) – used to simulate real-life swarms or herds by auto-
mated processes. Throughout this section, we will see how these rules are embedded in each agent’s
generative model and how they influence its internal state, along with observations of neighboring
agents’ states.
A.2 Generative model for flocking
Let us consider an ensemble ofNbirds deployed on a two-dimensional lattice of sideL=
√
Nwith
coordination numberM= 8, representing next-nearest-neighbor interactions.
Each bird is in one ofqdiscrete internal states corresponding to a movement in one of theqlattice
directions; just one bird can occupy each sitei. In the single bird’s generative model occupying the site
i, the hidden statez i encodes its propensity to get one ofq= 4 discrete internal states corresponding
to cardinal directions. Each bird is active in the sense that it can flip its internal state and move to a
different site. Then, its own control statesu i is an integer in [0, q−1].
10
The observations ˜σi for each single bird consist of the collection of spin statesσ j (withj∈Mand
j̸=i) of itsMneighboring agents. In our setup, each bird acts as both the process that generates
observations for other birds and the generative model that infers the cause of those observations. Note
that the action of one bird constitutes the observed outcomes for another (at the subsequent time
step). Therefore, a bird is in a state with a probability corresponding to its beliefs about the average
state of its neighborhood at the previous time step.
We can give the expression of the full predictive generative model of a single bird at timetmeant
as a joint distributionP(˜σ t, zt, ut) over the neighborhood observations ˜σt, the current hidden state
zt and the related control stateu t. One can factorize this distribution to have a form constituted of
tractable expressions:
P(˜σt, zt, ut) =P(˜σt|zt)P(zt|ut)P(ut) (1)
that includes:
•A likelihoodP(˜σ t|zi
t) encoding neighborly relations. Using the three Reynolds’ rules to define
likelihood establishes how the agents interact. The whole likelihood can be expressed as the
product of the single observationsσ j received by a single bird in the siteiwith internal statez i;
hence, the likelihood can be factorized asP(˜σ|z i) = QM
j P(σ j|zi) , where:
P(σ j|zi;i, j, β) = exp{−βR(i, j)}PM
k=1 exp{−βR(i, k)}
(2)
whereβis thetemperatureof the softmax function, andR: (i, j)∈Λ×Λ−→Ris a real function
defined over the pairs that the siteicomposes with the neighboring sites, such that:
R(i, j) =



vm,|η i −ζ j|= 0
ca,|η i −ζ j|=π∧θ ij =η i
fc,|η i −ζ j|=π∧θ ij ̸=η i
0,|η i −ζ j| ∈
π
2 , 3
2 π
	
(3)
whereθ ij is the angle associated to the two-dimensional unit position vector (ri−rj) = (cosθ ij,sinθ ij)
of the lattice sitejconcerning to the sitei, withδ i andζ j respectively defined asη i = 2πzi/q,
ζj = 2πσj/q, withz i = 0, . . . , q−1, andσj = 0, . . . , q−1. Each one of the real valuesvm,c p, and
fd is related to a Reynolds’ rule; they correspond respectively to thevelocity matching,collision
avoidance, andflock centeringparameters. For instance, settingv m >0 we induce the bird to
match the averaged observed state of its neighborhood; setting appropriate values forc a and
fd we induce in the bird a tendency to penalize heading directions parallel and opposite to the
averaged observed state (|ηi −ζ j|=π) both to avoid collisions when the verses of corresponding
directions are convergent (θ ij =η i), and to force the bird to stay in group when verses are di-
vergent (θij ̸=η i). In our simulations, we used the following parameter values:v m = 4,c a = 2,
andf c = 1.
Finally,R(i, j) is zero when the states of the bird and the neighbor are orthogonal, and this cir-
cumstance describes configurations where no particular utility, neither rewarding nor penalizing,
is assigned.
•A state transitionP(z t|ut), such that:
P(zt|ut;ρ) = exp{−ρ δzt,ut }P
u exp{−ρ δzt,u},(4)
withz 0 ∼Cat(1/q, . . . ,1/q) whent= 0, that assigns to a bird the flight direction specified by
the actionu t.
•A posterior distribution over control states defined as:
P(ut;γ) = exp{−γG(u t)}P
u exp{−γG(u t)} (5)
11
whereG(u t) is the expected free energy of the policyu t one-control-state long, andγ∈Ris a
variable denoted as “active inference precision”, on-line computed to self-tune the control-state
selection process adaptively Starting fromGdefinition as ELBO (Evidence Lower BOund) of
the model evidence, it is possible to lead this expression back to already known distributions by
using the positionQ(σ|z, u)≜P(σ|z), whereQdenotes thevariational approximationfor the
generative model. Through easy algebraic manipulations, we can writeGas:
G(u) =E Q(z,σ|u)

log Q(z|u)
P(z, σ|u)

=E Q(z,σ|u)

log Q(z|u)
P(z|σ, u)P(σ|u)

≈E Q(z,σ|u)

log Q(z|u)
Q(z|σ, u)P(σ|u)

=E Q(z,σ|u)

log Q(σ|u)
Q(σ|z, u)P(σ|u)

=E Q(z|u)P(σ|z)

log Q(σ|u)
P(σ|z)P(σ|u)

(6)
In the expression that comes out from the last derivation step,Q(z|u) is the state estimation
carried out by the outcome predicted at the previous time step, andQ(σ|u) is the current outcome
belief. In contrast,P(σ|z) is the likelihood defined in Equation (2), andP(σ|u) is a “goal prior”,
i.e., a preferred outcome that renders the preference of being conservative and observing the
same state in the future.
The probability distribution of the predictive future outcome ˜σt ={σ j
t }j=0,...,q−1 can be encoded
asP(˜σt|ut)≡P(˜σ t|˜σt−1) = QM
j=1 P(σ j
t |σj
t−1), with:
P(σ j
t |σj
t−1;ω) =
exp
n
−ω δσj
t ,σj
t−1
o
Pq−1
k=0 exp
n
−ω δk,σj
t
o
whereω∈Ris a precision parameter, andδ ·,· denotes the Kronecker delta. Then, in this model,
we have assumed that the goal probabilities follow a Boltzmann distribution conditioned by the
state of the neighboring birds.
In our simulations, all the temperature parametersβ,ρ, andωused in the distributions were set equal
to 1.
A.3 A generative model variant for escaping from predator attacks
Flocks escape predators through a combination of individual birds and collective behaviors that enable
faster reactions and collective escape maneuvers.
Individual vigilance, dilution and detection [17], the ”fountain effect” [33], and confusion [58] are
some of the escape strategies that rely on the benefits of being in a flock, where the probability of
survival of any one individual increases when its behavior is configurable within a group response.
The choice of escape strategy depends on multiple factors [39], such as the predator’s approach—
the closer the predator gets, the more likely the flock is to initiate an escape response—, the reaction
time variation—the distance between predators and individuals influences their reaction time—, and
the flock size, connected to predation risk of any individuals as highlithed also by the selfish herd
theory [34].
Simulating a collective escape strategy entails extending the original flocking model: each bird
must be able to recognize danger and modify behavior in safety situations. To this end, we introduce a
second factor, named “stress state”, in the hidden state that encodes the presence of danger. Therefore,
the hidden state of the extended model becomesz i =z i1 ⊗z i2, wherez i1 coincides with the hidden
state of the original model, andz i2 is a binary variable that indicates being (z i2 = 1) or not (z i2 = 0)
in danger.
12
Analogously, we account for the observation of stress responses by adding, for eachσj1, correspond-
ing to the states ofj-th neighbor individual, another factor encoding its stress outcomeσ j2, so that
˜σ= ˜σ1 ⊗˜σ2, ultimately.
At this point, we need to characterize birds’ behavior in dangerous situations. We decided to
implement the confusion strategy as an escape strategy. In practice, birds in the flock respond to a
predator’s attack by fleeing at random. To do this, we need to modify the likelihood matrixP(˜σ|zi1, zi2)
by extending it to the conditional probabilities of the observations ˜σgiven the hidden statez i2. When
zi2 = 0, the extended likelihood matrix is still defined as Equation (2), withσ j ≡σ j1, while the threat-
related componentσ j2 is uninformative (all the elements have the same value and every column sums
to one). In contrast, whenz i2 = 1, the componentP(σ j1|zi1,1) of the likelihood is uninformative; in
contrast, the expression ofP(σ j2|zi1,1) is analogous to that in Equation (2), taking care to replace
the functionR(i, j) introduced in Equation (3) with the function ¯R(i, j) that satisfies the following
conditions:
¯R(i, j) =

cp,|η i −ζ j|=π∧θ ij =η i
−R(i, j),o/w (7)
.
In a way,z i2 is a context variable that shapes the perception of the states of neighboring birds and
affects the choice of action. Actually, in the latter case, the influence is mutual. Indeed, similarly to
the case without predators withz i
t ≡z i1
t (see Equation (4)), there exists a transition probability that
probabilistically attributes a value to the stress state toz i1
t , every time an actionuis executed.
Unlikez i1
t , the transition model ofz i2
t is conditioned by some parameters that entail how the stress
state evolves. We presumed that the stress state could follow a specific dynamics that, from the initial
threat, leads to a state of no danger present before the attack. Specifically, suppose to denote as ¯tthe
time at which a generic bird has a predator (or a “stressed” bird) in its neighborhood. In that case,
we hypothesize that its hidden statez i2
¯t transitions from 0 to 1, then decays to 0 with a mean lifetime
constantτ. After that, the individual remains in a quiet state withz i2
t = 0 for a refractory period
Tr, during which the individual does not respond to new danger situations. The following transition
model can represent the entire dynamics over time:
P(z i2
t |ut; ¯t, τ, Tr) =



 
0 0
1 1
!
, ¯t < t≤¯t+τ
 
1 1
0 0
!
, ¯t+τ < t≤ ¯t+τ+T r
 
1 0
0 1
!
,o/w
(8)
where the columns and rows of the matrices represent the values ofzi2
t−1 andz i2
t , respectively. It should
be noted that Equation (8) is independent of the actionu t executed and, instead, depends exclusively
on the time. In our simulations, we setτ= 2 andT r = 10.
A.4 Spectral Identification of Markov Blankets via Fiedler Vector Analysis
We adopted a spectral approach to detect Markov blankets that characterize groups of birds flying in
the same direction, forming a macro-agent.
By fixing a time windowT w, we can represent the whole flock as an undirected graphF= (V, E),
where the nodes are the birds and the edges denote the fact that two birds fly in the same direction,
at least once inT w. We can assume thatAis the weighted adjacency matrix of that graph, whereA ij
is the number of times the nodesiandjare connected (have equal direction).
The Markov blanket of a subset of nodesS⊂Vis defined as the minimal setM b(S) such thatS
is conditionally independent ofV\(S∪M b(S)) givenM b(S).
For community detection applications, we consider the Markov blanket separating two communities
C1 andC 2 as the subset of boundary nodes that minimizes information flow between the communities
while maintaining graph connectivity. To find these boundary nodes, we determine the algebraic con-
nectivity (also known as Fiedler eigenvalue) of the graph by computing the second-smallest eigenvalue
13
of the Laplacian matrix ofFdefined asL=D−AwhereD= diag( P
j Aij) is the degree matrix. The
Fiedler vectory 2 [15] is the eigenvector corresponding to the second smallest eigenvalueλ 2 ofL, such
thatLy 2 =λ 2y2.
The Fiedler vector provides a natural embedding of nodes along the principal axis of spectral sepa-
ration. Nodes are projected onto a one-dimensional space where their positions reflect their structural
roles: nodes with|y 2(i)| ≈1 represent core members of the communities; nodes with|y 2(i)| ≈0
constitute the Markov blanket between communities. We identify Markov blanket nodes through
thresholding:
Mb ={i∈V:|y 2(i)| ≤α}(9)
where the thresholdαis determined adaptively based on the distribution ofy 2 values, typically set
to capture nodes within the 10th-20th percentile of absolute Fiedler values. The quality of a node is
determined by its degree of connection to the communities. For instance, taking as a reference the
communityC 1, a nodeiis internal ify 2(i)> α, external ify 2(i)<−α, and either active or sensory if,
respectively, its connection degree is higher withC 1 orC 2.
Acknowledgments
This research received funding from the European Research Council under the Grant Agreement No.
820213 (ThinkAhead), the Italian National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), M4C2, funded by
the European Union – NextGenerationEU (Project IR0000011, CUP B51E22000150006, ‘EBRAINS-
Italy’; Project PE0000013, ‘FAIR’; Project PE0000006, ‘MNESYS’), and the Ministry of University
and Research, PRIN PNRR P20224FESY and PRIN 20229Z7M8N. The GEFORCE Quadro RTX6000
and Titan GPU cards used for this research were donated by the NVIDIA Corporation. We used a
Generative AI model to correct typographical errors and edit language for clarity.
Authors’ Contributions
All the authors contributed to the conceptualization and writing of the manuscript.
Competing Interests
We have no competing interests.
References
[1] Amira Abdel-Rahman, Christopher Cameron, Benjamin Jenett, Miana Smith, and Neil Gershen-
feld. Self-replicating hierarchical modular robotic swarms.Communications Engineering, 1(1):35,
2022.
[2] Clemens Bechinger, Roberto Di Leonardo, Hartmut L¨ owen, Charles Reichhardt, Giorgio Volpe,
and Giovanni Volpe. Active particles in complex and crowded environments.Reviews of modern
physics, 88(4):045006, 2016.
[3] Lukas Beckenbauer, Johannes-Lucas Loewe, Ge Zheng, and Alexandra Brintrup. Orchestrator:
Active inference for multi-agent systems in long-horizon tasks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05651,
2025.
[4] William Bialek, Andrea Cavagna, Irene Giardina, Thierry Mora, Edmondo Silvestri, Massimiliano
Viale, and Aleksandra M Walczak. Statistical mechanics for natural flocks of birds.Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(13):4786–4791, 2012.
[5] M.E. Bratman.Shared agency: A planning theory of acting together. Oxford University Press,
2013.
[6] Stephen A Butterfill and Corrado Sinigaglia. Towards a mechanistically neutral account of acting
jointly: The notion of a collective goal.Mind, 132(525):1–29, 2023.
14
[7] Andrea Cavagna, Alessio Cimarelli, Irene Giardina, Giorgio Parisi, Raffaele Santagati, Fabio
Stefanini, and Massimiliano Viale. Scale-free correlations in starling flocks.Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107(26):11865–11870, 2010.
[8] Swarnajit Chatterjee, Matthieu Mangeat, Raja Paul, and Heiko Rieger. Flocking and reorientation
transition in the 4-state active potts model.Europhysics Letters, 130(6):66001, 2020.
[9] Andy Clark and David Chalmers. The extended mind.analysis, 58(1):7–19, 1998.
[10] H. H. Clark.Using Language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996.
[11] Roger C Conant and W Ross Ashby. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that
system.International journal of systems science, 1(2):89–97, 1970.
[12] Iain D Couzin, Jens Krause, Nigel R Franks, and Simon A Levin. Effective leadership and
decision-making in animal groups on the move.Nature, 433(7025):513–516, 2005.
[13] Gustavo Deco, Giulio Tononi, Melanie Boly, and Morten L Kringelbach. Rethinking segregation
and integration: contributions of whole-brain modelling.Nature reviews neuroscience, 16(7):430–
439, 2015.
[14] Marco Dorigo, Guy Theraulaz, and Vito Trianni. Swarm robotics: Past, present, and future [point
of view].Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(7):1152–1165, 2021.
[15] Miroslav Fiedler. Algebraic connectivity of graphs.Czechoslovak mathematical journal, 23(2):298–
305, 1973.
[16] Jakob Foerster, Francis Song, Edward Hughes, Neil Burch, Iain Dunning, Shimon Whiteson,
Matthew Botvinick, and Michael Bowling. Bayesian action decoder for deep multi-agent rein-
forcement learning. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1942–1951. PMLR,
2019.
[17] WA Foster and JE Treherne. Evidence for the dilution effect in the selfish herd from fish predation
on a marine insect.Nature, 293(5832), 1981.
[18] Walter J Freeman. Characterization of state transitions in spatially distributed, chaotic, nonlinear,
dynamical systems in cerebral cortex.Integrative Physiological and Behavioral Science, 29(3):294–
306, 1994.
[19] K. Friston and C. Frith. A duet for one.Consciousness and Cognition, 36:390–405, 2015.
[20] Karl Friston. Life as we know it.Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86):20130475, 2013.
[21] Karl Friston, Michael Breakspear, and Gustavo Deco. Perception and self-organized instability.
Frontiers in computational neuroscience, 6:44, 2012.
[22] Karl Friston, Lancelot Da Costa, Dalton AR Sakthivadivel, Conor Heins, Grigorios A Pavliotis,
Maxwell Ramstead, and Thomas Parr. Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange things.
Physics of Life Reviews, 47:35–62, 2023.
[23] Karl Friston, Michael Levin, Biswa Sengupta, and Giovanni Pezzulo. Knowing one’s place: a free-
energy approach to pattern regulation.Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 12(105):20141383,
2015.
[24] Karl J Friston, Thomas Parr, Conor Heins, Axel Constant, Daniel Friedman, Takuya Isomura,
Chris Fields, Tim Verbelen, Maxwell Ramstead, John Clippinger, et al. Federated inference and
belief sharing.Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 156:105500, 2024.
[25] Chris Frith and Uta Frith. Theory of mind.Current biology, 15(17):R644–R645, 2005.
[26] Armin Fuchs, JA Scott Kelso, and Hermann Haken. Phase transitions in the human brain: Spatial
mode dynamics.International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, 2(04):917–939, 1992.
15
[27] Vittorio Gallese, Christian Keysers, and Giacomo Rizzolatti. A unifying view of the basis of social
cognition.Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(9):396–403, 2004.
[28] Mattia Gallotti and Chris D Frith. Social cognition in the we-mode.Trends in cognitive sciences,
17(4):160–165, 2013.
[29] Daniela Gandolfi, Francesco M Puglisi, Giulia M Boiani, Giuseppe Pagnoni, Karl J Friston, Egidio
D’Angelo, and Jonathan Mapelli. Emergence of associative learning in a neuromorphic inference
network.Journal of Neural Engineering, 19(3):036022, 2022.
[30] Daniela Gandolfi, Mirco Tincani, Giulia Maria Boiani, Lorenzo Benatti, Tommaso Zanotti, Gio-
vanni Pezzulo, Giuseppe Pagnoni, Francesco Maria Puglisi, and Jonathan Mapelli. A network of
bayesian agents for reward prediction and noise tolerance.iScience, 2025.
[31] Margaret Gilbert.On social facts. Princeton University Press, 2020.
[32] Luis G´ omez-Nava, Robert T Lange, Pascal P Klamser, Juliane Lukas, Lenin Arias-Rodriguez,
David Bierbach, Jens Krause, Henning Sprekeler, and Pawel Romanczuk. Fish shoals resemble
a stochastic excitable system driven by environmental perturbations.Nature Physics, 19(5):663–
669, 2023.
[33] SJ Hall, CS Wardle, and DN MacLennan. Predator evasion in a fish school: test of a model for
the fountain effect.Marine biology, 91(1):143–148, 1986.
[34] William D Hamilton. Geometry for the selfish herd.Journal of theoretical Biology, 31(2):295–311,
1971.
[35] U. Hasson and C.D. Frith. Mirroring and beyond: coupled dynamics as a generalized framework
for modelling social interactions.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 373:20170301,
2016.
[36] U. Hasson, A. A. Ghazanfar, B. Galantucci, S. Garrod, and C. Keysers. Brain-to-brain coupling:
A mechanism for creating and sharing a social world.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16:114–121,
2012.
[37] Conor Heins, Beren Millidge, Lancelot Da Costa, Richard P Mann, Karl J Friston, and Iain D
Couzin. Collective behavior from surprise minimization.Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 121(17):e2320239121, 2024.
[38] Janina Hesse and Thilo Gross. Self-organized criticality as a fundamental property of neural
systems.Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 8:166, 2014.
[39] Geoff M Hilton, Will Cresswell, and Graeme D Ruxton. Intraflock variation in the speed of
escape-flight response on attack by an avian predator.Behavioral Ecology, 10(4):391–395, 1999.
[40] Erik P Hoel, Larissa Albantakis, and Giulio Tononi. Quantifying causal emergence shows that
macro can beat micro.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(49):19790–19795,
2013.
[41] Douglas R Hofstadter.G¨ odel, Escher, Bach: an eternal golden braid. Basic books, 1999.
[42] Bert H¨ olldobler and EO Wilson. The superorganism: the beauty, elegance, and strangeness of
insect societies, 1st edn new york.NY: WW Norton.[Google Scholar], 2009.
[43] Ernst Ising. Beitrag zur theorie des ferromagnetismus.Zeitschrift f¨ ur Physik, 31:253–258, 1925.
[44] P.E. Keller, G. Novembre, and M.J. Hove. Rhythm in joint action: psychological and neurophys-
iological mechanisms for real-time interpersonal coordination.Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 371(1693):20150366, 2016.
[45] James M Kilner, Karl J Friston, and Chris D Frith. The mirror-neuron system: a bayesian
perspective.Neuroreport, 18(6):619–623, 2007.
16
[46] Michael Kirchhoff, Thomas Parr, Ensor Palacios, Karl Friston, and Julian Kiverstein. The markov
blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle.Journal of The royal
society interface, 15(138):20170792, 2018.
[47] J Krause and GD Ruxton.Living in groups.Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 2002.
[48] Georgiy Levchuk, Krishna Pattipati, Daniel Serfaty, Adam Fouse, and Robert McCormack. Active
inference in multiagent systems: context-driven collaboration and decentralized purpose-driven
team adaptation. InArtificial intelligence for the internet of everything, pages 67–85. Elsevier,
2019.
[49] Michael Levin. The computational boundary of a “self”: developmental bioelectricity drives
multicellularity and scale-free cognition.Frontiers in psychology, 10:2688, 2019.
[50] Michael Levin. Bioelectric signaling: Reprogrammable circuits underlying embryogenesis, regen-
eration, and cancer.Cell, 184(8):1971–1989, 2021.
[51] Michael Levin. Bioelectrical approaches to cancer as a problem of the scaling of the cellular self.
Progress in biophysics and molecular biology, 165:102–113, 2021.
[52] Michael Levin, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Joshua M Finkelstein. Endogenous bioelectric signaling
networks: exploiting voltage gradients for control of growth and form.Annual review of biomedical
engineering, 19(1):353–387, 2017.
[53] Domenico Maisto, Francesco Donnarumma, and Giovanni Pezzulo. Interactive inference: A multi-
agent model of cooperative joint actions.IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
54(2):704–715, 2023.
[54] Santosh Manicka and Michael Levin. Field-mediated bioelectric basis of morphogenetic prepat-
terning.Cell Reports Physical Science, 6(10), 2025.
[55] Kerry L Marsh, Michael J Richardson, and Richard C Schmidt. Social connection through joint
action and interpersonal coordination.Topics in cognitive science, 1(2):320–339, 2009.
[56] Patrick McMillen and Michael Levin. Collective intelligence: A unifying concept for integrating
biology across scales and substrates.Communications Biology, 7(1):378, 2024.
[57] Marvin Minsky.Society of mind. Simon and Schuster, 1986.
[58] SRStJ Neill and Jonathan M Cullen. Experiments on whether schooling by their prey affects the
hunting behaviour of cephalopods and fish predators.Journal of Zoology, 172(4):549–569, 1974.
[59] Elisabeth Pacherie. How does it feel to act together?Phenomenology and the cognitive sciences,
13(1):25–46, 2014.
[60] Ensor Rafael Palacios, Takuya Isomura, Thomas Parr, and Karl Friston. The emergence of
synchrony in networks of mutually inferring neurons.Scientific reports, 9(1):6412, 2019.
[61] T. Parr, G. Pezzulo, and K.J. Friston.Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind,
Brain, and Behavior. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2022.
[62] Thomas Parr, Lancelot Da Costa, and Karl Friston. Markov blankets, information geom-
etry and stochastic thermodynamics.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A,
378(2164):20190159, 2020.
[63] Judea Pearl.Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Else-
vier, 2014.
[64] G. Pezzulo, F. Donnarumma, H. Dindo, A. D’Ausilio, I. Konvalinka, and C. Castelfranchi. The
body talks: Sensorimotor communication and its brain and kinematic signatures.Physics of Life
Reviews, 15:1–21, 2019.
17
[65] Giovanni Pezzulo, Pierpaolo Iodice, Francesco Donnarumma, Haris Dindo, and G¨ unther Knoblich.
Avoiding accidents at the champagne reception: A study of joint lifting and balancing.Psycho-
logical science, 28(3):338–345, 2017.
[66] Giovanni Pezzulo, G¨ unther Knoblich, Domenico Maisto, Francesco Donnarumma, Elisabeth
Pacherie, and Uri Hasson. A predictive processing framework for joint action and communication.
PsyArXiv Preprints, 2025.
[67] Giovanni Pezzulo and Michael Levin. Top-down models in biology: explanation and control
of complex living systems above the molecular level.Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
13(124):20160555, 2016.
[68] Giovanni Pezzulo, Thomas Parr, and Karl J Friston. Shared worlds, shared minds: Strategies to
develop physically and socially embedded ai.EMBO reports, 26(17):4197–4202, 2025.
[69] L´ eo Pio-Lopez, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Michael Levin. Scale-free niche construction: expanding
agent-microenvironment co-development to unconventional substrates.OSF Preprints, 2025.
[70] Craig W Reynolds. Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed behavioral model. InProceedings of
the 14th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 25–34, 1987.
[71] Giacomo Rizzolatti and Laila Craighero. The mirror-neuron system.Annu. Rev. Neurosci.,
27(1):169–192, 2004.
[72] Fernando E Rosas, Pedro AM Mediano, Henrik J Jensen, Anil K Seth, Adam B Barrett, Robin L
Carhart-Harris, and Daniel Bor. Reconciling emergences: An information-theoretic approach to
identify causal emergence in multivariate data.PLoS computational biology, 16(12):e1008289,
2020.
[73] Jaime Ruiz-Serra, Patrick Sweeney, and Michael S Harr´ e. Factorised active inference for strategic
multi-agent interactions.arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07362, 2024.
[74] R Keith Sawyer.Social emergence: Societies as complex systems. Cambridge University Press,
2005.
[75] Natalie Sebanz, Harold Bekkering, and G¨ unther Knoblich. Joint action: bodies and minds moving
together.Trends in cognitive sciences, 10(2):70–76, 2006.
[76] Natalie Sebanz and G¨ unther Knoblich. Progress in joint-action research.Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 30(2):138–143, 2021.
[77] Alexandre P Solon and Julien Tailleur. Revisiting the flocking transition using active spins.
Physical review letters, 111(7):078101, 2013.
[78] Vivek H Sridhar, Liang Li, Dan Gorbonos, M´ at´ e Nagy, Bianca R Schell, Timothy Sorochkin,
Nir S Gov, and Iain D Couzin. The geometry of decision-making in individuals and collectives.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(50):e2102157118, 2021.
[79] Robert Sugden. The logic of team reasoning.Philosophical explorations, 6(3):165–181, 2003.
[80] David JT Sumpter. Collective animal behavior. InCollective animal behavior. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2010.
[81] Ning Tang, Siyi Gong, Minglu Zhao, Chenya Gu, Jifan Zhou, Mowei Shen, and Tao Gao. Exploring
an imagined “we” in human collective hunting: Joint commitment within shared intentionality.
InProceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive science society, volume 44, 2022.
[82] Michael Tomasello, Malinda Carpenter, Josep Call, Tanya Behne, and Henrike Moll. Under-
standing and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition.Behavioral and brain sciences,
28(5):675–691, 2005.
[83] Paul L Williams and Randall D Beer. Nonnegative decomposition of multivariate information.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1004.2515, 2010.
18
[84] Daniel M Wolpert, Kenji Doya, and Mitsuo Kawato. A unifying computational framework for
motor control and social interaction.Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., B, 358(1431):593–602, 2003.
[85] Fa-Yueh Wu. The potts model.Reviews of modern physics, 54(1):235, 1982.
19