Intent-based Meta-Scheduling in Programmable
Networks: A Research Agenda
Nanjangud C. Narendra, Ronak Kanthaliya, Venkatareddy Akumalla
Dept. of Electrical Communication Engineering and FSID, Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
ncnaren@gmail.com; ronak@fsid-iisc.in; venkatareddy@fsid-iisc.in
Abstract—The emergence and growth of 5G and beyond 5G
(B5G) networks has brought about the rise of so-called “pro-
grammable” networks, i.e., networks whose operational require-
ments are so stringent that they can only be met in an automated
manner, with minimal/no human involvement. Any requirements
on such a network would need to be formally specified via
intents, which can represent user requirements in a formal
yet understandable manner. Meeting the user requirements via
intents would necessitate the rapid implementation of resource
allocation and scheduling in the network. Also, given the expected
size and geographical distribution of programmable networks,
multiple resource scheduling implementations would need to be
implemented at the same time. This would necessitate the use
of a meta-scheduler that can coordinate the various schedulers
and dynamically ensure optimal resource scheduling across the
network.
To that end, in this position paper, we propose a research
agenda for modeling, implementation, and inclusion of intent-
based dynamic meta-scheduling in programmable networks. Our
research agenda will be built on active inference, a type of causal
inference. Active inference provides some level of autonomy to
each scheduler while the meta-scheduler takes care of overall
intent fulfillment. Our research agenda will comprise a strawman
architecture for meta-scheduling and a set of research questions
that need to be addressed to make intent-based dynamic meta-
scheduling a reality.
Index Terms—5G, Programmable Networks, O-RAN, 3GPP,
Multi-access Edge Computing, Intent-driven Management,
Scheduling, Resource Allocation, Meta-Scheduling, Causal In-
ference, Active Inference
I. I NTRODUCTION
The growth of programmable networks, driven by advances
in 5G/6G technologies [1], has raised the need for rapid
automated resource scheduling approaches. In particular, for
6G networks, resource scheduling is expected to be imple-
mented within the sub-millisecond timeframe to meet 6G’s
stringent latency requirements. Intents [2]–[5] are being seen
as an effective mechanism for such rapid resource schedul-
ing. Intents are at the same time human-understandable and
machine-readable and are emerging as the standard approach
for requirements specification and tracking in most telecom-
Financial support for this work from a research grant from the Ministry
of Electronics and Information Technology, Govt. of India, is gratefully
acknowledged. The authors also wish to thank Anurag Kumar, Chandra R.
Murthy, and Bharat Dwivedi for their comments.
munication standards bodies such as 3GPP 1, Telemanagement
Forum2, and O-RAN 3.
Within the programmable networks area, the trend is to-
wards disaggregation of the network via architectures such as
O-RAN [6]. One key feature of O-RAN relevant for us, is
that it emphasizes separation of control and user planes in
wireless networks. This separation enables the decomposition
of intents from the user level down to the Radio Unit (RU)
level, to facilitate optimal resource scheduling.
However, another key issue with programmable networks
is their size and scale, which is expected to be much larger
than the networks of today. Such networks are expected to
be dense [7]–[9], requiring special scheduling approaches
tailored to dense networks [10]. Furthermore, such large-
scale networks could also be subdivided into administrative
domains [11] and hence, would need to be managed in a
distributed manner.
Hence the combination of ultra-low latency and large size
and scale would make the job of resource scheduling ex-
tremely complex. The particular concern here would be the
large number of scheduling algorithms that would need to be
simultaneously implemented to cater to multiple user requests.
This would increase the possibility of conflicts, necessitating
the establishment of a meta-scheduling approach [12] to co-
ordinate among the schedulers.
In this position paper, we investigate this crucial research
issue of meta-scheduling. We propose the use of intent-based
management to model and implement meta-scheduling to
coordinate and control the numerous schedulers that would
be running in a programmable network. Capitalizing on the
disaggregated nature of O-RAN, we show how intents can
be decomposed from the user level, all the way down to the
RU level to enable resource scheduling, and how this intent
management hierarchy can be managed via meta-scheduling
approaches. In particular, we show how the newly emerging
technique of active inference [13], [14], derived from the well-
established idea of causal inference [15], can help design
and implement optimal meta-schedulers that can also facilitate
hierarchical and federated learning approaches for schedul-
ing [16], [17]. In addition, we will present our research agenda
1https://www.3gpp.org/
2https://www.tmforum.org/
3https://www.o-ran.org/
arXiv:2412.04232v3  [cs.NI]  22 Dec 2024
in this space, which will comprise the key research questions
to be addressed to make intent-based meta-scheduling a reality.
II. I NTENT -DRIVEN PROGRAMMABLE NETWORKS
The key aspect of a programmable network is that control
of the network is separated from operation. This lends itself to
making the network programmable via intents. An intent, as
defined by the TeleManagement Forum (TMForum) [18], “is
the formal specification of all expectations including require-
ments, goals, and constraints given to a technical system”.
From a user’s perspective, it expresses what a system is
expected to achieve. It includes all the system needs to know,
i.e., goals, requirements, constraints, etc. It needs formal
modeling and common semantics to be understandable to
the system; however, it is also intuitively understandable by
humans. It is not only used on the human-machine interface,
but in internal goal-setting between sub-systems, and this
aspect makes intents valuable for our purposes, as will be seen
later in this paper. Natural language and other domain-specific
languages can be used which requires local interpretation and
translation into the common intent model. It also has its life
cycle actively managed by the intent creator through the intent
API [18], [19]. Intent-based management has started to be used
in several trial customer deployments, e.g., [20].
The crucial aspect of intents is that they are decomposable.
That is, as shown in Fig. 1, an intent can be specified at
the Business Support System (BSS) layer, and decomposed
further down to the Operations Support System (OSS), RAN,
Transport, and Core layers of the network stack. This lends
itself to the step-wise decomposition of user requirements at
the BSS layer down to the network and 5G core layers. This
property of intents makes them suitable for adaptable and
flexible decision-making in programmable networks.
At each level in the network stack, intent management
functions (IMF) can be defined, whose task is to translate
the intents defined by IMFs in the upper layer into intents
that IMFs can implement at the lower layer. An IMF would
therefore be performing the role of an intent owner or intent
handler, depending on when it is (respectively) assigning
or decomposing intents. When the intent can no longer be
decomposed at the lowest layer, the intent handler would have
to implement the intent.
Each IMF would therefore go through a closed loop, driven
by machine reasoning, as shown in Fig. 2. This comprises
the following: (a) measurement agents that report the state of
the network at the level below that of the IMF and report
to it; (b) assurance agents, that determine what needs to be
implemented based on the arriving intent; (c) proposal agent
that proposes one or more intent decompositions, comprising
a combination of decomposition and actuation as needed; (d)
evaluation agent, that evaluates the proposals and selects the
best one; and (e) actuation agent that implements the actual
decomposition and actuation. Of course, all this is underpinned
by a cognitive framework [21] to operate the agents and
help them perform machine reasoning tasks to achieve their
respective objectives.
Automated intent decomposition, although still at a nascent
stage, is emerging as an active research area. One example
of intent decomposition, which also incorporates distribution
of intents across administrative domains, is presented in [11].
An energy-aware intent decomposition algorithm is presented
in [22]. Intent decomposition using event calculus to represent
the intents, and logical reasoning to model the intent decom-
position process, is presented in [23]. Intent decomposition
and propagation of the decomposed intents for network slice
design is presented in [24].
By way of exposition, for readers unfamiliar with intent-
based management, we have summarized the intent decompo-
sition approach from [11] in Appendix A. We have chosen [11]
since it provides an overall perspective of intent decomposi-
tion, while also illustrating the highly distributed and multi-
domain nature of programmable networks.
III. I NTENT -BASED RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND
SCHEDULING IN PROGRAMMABLE NETWORKS
We position our intent-based meta-scheduling approach
within O-RAN [6], since it is the latest version of a pro-
grammable network. Moreover, the disaggregated nature of
O-RAN makes it suitable to incorporate and extend the intent
decomposition approach depicted in Fig. 1. The O-RAN
logical architecture is as depicted in Fig. 3.
Consider, for example, the drone use case as shown in Fig. 4
(this has been reproduced from the O-RAN Use Case Analysis
Report [25]). The drone has a network-layer connection to its
nearest 5G cell, which is part of the zone of an edge site.
The drone’s connection to the 5G cells could be changed via
network-layer handover, based on the radio resource manage-
ment (RRM) algorithm employed at the Control Unit (CU-CP)
of the O-RAN system that runs the network.
Context-based dynamic handover management for this use
case will allow operators to adjust radio resource allocation
policies through the O-RAN architecture, reducing latency and
improving radio resource utilization. This would be done via
the UTM (UA V Traffic Management) module as depicted in
Fig. 4.
When the drone crosses the boundary between edge sites,
any of its microservices running on the source edge site
should be migrated to the target edge site within specified
latency limits, ensuring coordinated handover at application
and network layers. This requirement would therefore be
specified as an intent by the BSS layer to the SMO. A simple
example of a latency metric, defined as per the intent common
model proposed by TMForum, is shown in Fig. 5. When it
comes to successful handover for intent management function-
based services, the UE context transfer/retrieval and bearer
setup in the target should happen within a specified time.
Thus, the Control Unit-Control Plane (CU-CP), Control Unit-
User Plane (CU-UP), and Distributed Unit (DU) would have
to coordinate to make this happen.
Conversely, any IMF could advertise its capability via its
capability profile [26], which would allow IMFs at the next
higher layer to determine what type of intents it can handle.
Fig. 1. Intent Decomposition - from [2]
Fig. 2. Intent Management Loop - from [2]
Fig. 3. O-RAN Logical Architecture
Fig. 4. Flight Path-based Dynamic UA V Radio Resource Allocation
The capability profile of an IMF that can serve as both an
intent owner and intent handler, and which can handle latency
and throughput intents, is shown in Fig. 6.
Based on the upper limit of 50 ms specified in Fig. 5,
and referring to Fig. 3, the Service Management and Orches-
tration framework (SMO) - through the nonRT-RIC - would
decompose this intent into, say, 20 ms for the cloud-native
network functions in the O-Cloud located at the edge site
(for the transport network, functions such as routers, firewalls,
etc.), and 30 ms for the nearRT-RIC. The nearRT-RIC would
decompose this further into suitable RRM intents at the CU-
CP, with emphasis on Radio Resource Control (RRC). The CU
will then decompose the intent into one or more DUs, with
emphasis on Radio Link Control (RLC) and Medium Access
Control (MAC). For example, one DU could take up 18 ms
while the other DU could take up 12 ms. Finally, each DU
Fig. 5. Latency Metric Example
Fig. 6. Capability Profile Example
will then implement its intent at its Radio Units (RU).
Please note that for concreteness and as an illustration, we
have only described a rather simple latency metric example.
More complex examples would involve setting a time duration
within which a certain percentage of handovers should be
implemented within a certain latency limit, e.g., 85% of
handovers within the next 30 minutes should be implemented
within 50 ms. This would make radio resource allocation and
scheduling at the RUs dynamic, requiring methods such as
multi-agent online learning [27] to fulfill the intent.
IV. N EED FOR META-SCHEDULING
A. Rapid Resource Allocation and Scheduling
Rapid (typically sub-millisecond) resource allocation and
scheduling in programmable networks is crucial for several
reasons:
• Quality of Service (QoS): Programmable networks need
to maintain specific QoS parameters. Rapid scheduling
helps prioritize critical traffic and ensures that service
level agreements (SLAs) are met.
• Network Slicing: With the emergence of 5G and eventu-
ally 6G, network slicing [28] allows different applications
to run on the same physical infrastructure while meeting
diverse performance requirements. Rapid resource allo-
cation is essential for managing these slices effectively.
• Latency Sensitivity: Many applications, such as real-time
communications, online gaming, and UA Vs (as evidenced
from the example in Section III above), require extremely
low latency. Delays in resource allocation can lead to
degraded user experiences.
In addition to the above, in large-scale real-life pro-
grammable networks, catering to multiple user requests would
require multiple resource allocation and scheduling algorithms
to be implemented, on the same network resources, leading
to potential conflicts, which would degrade network perfor-
mance considerably [29], [30]. Preventing such conflicts from
arising, would require a higher-level entity that coordinates all
resource scheduling implementations, and in essence ensures
co-existence of various scheduling algorithms for various use
case types [31].
B. Meta Scheduling Architectural Framework
Building on the ideas presented above, our meta scheduling
architectural framework would therefore be a two-level frame-
work that mirrors the hierarchy shown in Fig. 1. Applied to
the O-RAN architecture of Fig. 3, our framework would be as
depicted in Fig. 7.
This framework would operate on two levels: meta-
scheduling and scheduling. At the meta-scheduling level, the
CU would be enhanced with the agents as depicted in Fig. 7,
and would work as follows:
1) The Assurance Agent would receive the user require-
ments. It is assumed that, due to the scale involved,
multiple user requirements would come in at the same
time. Referring to our UA V example above, this can be
reflected in a need to schedule handovers for multiple
UA Vs at the same time, with differing latency require-
ments for each UA V .
2) The Assurance Agent would evaluate the requirements
with the help of the Measurement Agent. The latter
would provide the former with information regarding the
latest state of the network as recorded in the Knowledge
Base (KB), as well as the underlying causal models
that represent the variables that would affect scheduling
decisions. These models are derived via active inference,
Fig. 7. Meta-Scheduling Architectural Framework
a type of causal inference that will be illustrated later in
Section IV-D.
3) The Proposal Agent would then develop meta-
scheduling proposals (i.e., policies) to fulfill all the user
requirements together while ensuring a fair (proportional
or otherwise [32]) and conflict-free meta-scheduling
approach.
4) The Evaluation Agent would evaluate the policies devel-
oped by the Proposal Agent and select the best policies
that would meet the user requirements.
5) The Decomposition Agent would send the selected meta-
scheduling policy to the Meta-Scheduling Coordinator,
for further forwarding to the various DUs. The appro-
priate scheduling policy to be assigned to each DU
would be determined by the Decomposition Agent, and
would be implemented as per the intent decomposition
approach described earlier in Section III.
6) The Meta-Scheduling Coordinator would serve as a mes-
sage bus that transmits messages (intent decompositions)
from the CU to DU, and responses (intent reports) from
DU to CU.
At the scheduling level, the DU would need to be enhanced
thus:
1) The Policy Evaluation Agent receives the scheduling
policy via the Meta-Scheduling Coordinator. It then eval-
uates the given policy against its own KB to determine
how feasible the policy would be, given the state of the
network under its control as recorded in its own KB.
2) The Policy Updation Agent would then update the
scheduling policy as per the inputs from the Policy
Evaluation Agent and send it to the Actuation Agent
for action.
3) The Actuation Agent would then implement the schedul-
ing policy on the RUs.
4) The Reporting Agent would observe the results of
scheduling and send its reports to the CU’s KB (and
as needed, to the DU’s own KB); this would be imple-
mented as per TMForum’s Intent Reporting API [33].
These intent reports would then be used to enhance the
knowledge in both KBs, with a view towards improving
meta-scheduling and scheduling algorithms in the future.
The question now arises as to why the facility of policy
updation at the DU level should be provided at all. The
reason for this, is that this is in keeping with the TMForum’s
philosophy (as pictorially depicted in Fig. 1) of providing
autonomy to intent management functions at every layer of the
network stack. This is also in line with the recent proposal to
complement rApps and xApps in the O-RAN standards [25]
with “dApps” [34] at the DU, which can operate at < 10
ms timescales and can be situated at the DU to perform
scheduling.
By way of illustration, we have depicted in Algorithm 1 how
the meta-scheduler can help fulfill intents at the base station
(gNB), using RAN schedulers for a given UE and the PDU
session.
Algorithm 1 Meta Scheduling Algorithm
1: if Intent then
2: CU and Meta Scheduler gets intent from IMF (Intent
Management Function)
3: CU chooses the DRB based on the mapping function
and DU uses the scheduling policy which is output of the
meta scheduler to meet the intent within the same slice
for differentiating the intent
4: DRB = f(Intent, 5QI)
5: Meta Scheduling policy = g(Intent, Slice differentiator,
Buffer status, CQI, Block Error rate)
6: RAN scheduling policy = h(Meta scheduling policy,
Buffer status, CQI, Block error rate (BLER))
7: else ▷ Intent is zero
8: DRB = f(0 , 5QI)
9: Meta Scheduling policy = g(0, Slice differentiator, Buffer
status, CQI, Block Error rate)
10: RAN scheduling policy = h(Meta scheduling policy,
Buffer status, CQI, Block error rate (BLER))
11: when UE moves from one CU/DU to another CU/DU
then the meta scheduler changes its inputs to the corre-
sponding new scheduler, accordingly.
12: The input to the RAN scheduler is based on the data
the meta scheduler has about the UE, the UE mobility and
gNB (CU+DU).
13: end if
C. Causal Reasoning for Scheduling
Recent attempts at resource scheduling in 5G and B5G (be-
yond 5G) networks has focused on machine learning methods
built on statistical principles. However, these methods suffer
from several shortcomings as highlighted in [35], viz., black
box nature, curve fitting nature that limits their adaptability,
reliance on large amounts of data, and energy inefficiency.
Indeed, one key issue in adopting such machine learning
approaches is model drift [36], i.e., the fact that network
conditions keep changing constantly, and hence the data on
which the machine learning algorithms are run, would be quite
dissimilar in distribution to the data on which the algorithms
were originally trained.
This raises the need for a causal reasoning [15] approach,
built on causal models that capture the relationships among
the data in the network, and can use these model to enhance
machine learning techniques used for resource scheduling.
Causal models for any variable in the network can be further
refined via the use of Markov Blankets [37]. In a causal model,
which is represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), the
Markov Blanket of any variable is the collection of its parents,
children and co-parents in the DAG. The Markov Blanket
would therefore comprise those variables that would affect
the variable in question. Hence any learning algorithm that
seeks to determine the value of the variable would need only
consider the members of the Markov Blanket as independent
Fig. 8. Factors that could affect Latency
variables. The Markov Blanket for any variable can be discov-
ered via techniques such as those described in [38].
As a simple illustration, consider Fig. 8, which shows some
(not all) factors that could affect latency. The factor ARFCN is
the exception in Fig. 8, and is shaded since it does not belong
to the Markov Blanket of latency.
Techniques such as those described in [39] could be devel-
oped to uncover causal relationships among the variables in the
CU, DU and RU of the O-RAN. Indeed, the technique in [39],
used unsupervised learning to uncover a causal association
between a Configuration Management parameter and degraded
performance of a set of Base Stations (BSs). The technique
used was an autoencoder based on an unsupervised Deep
Neural Network (DNN), which extracted a lower-dimensional
representation from the Performance Management (PM) and
CM indicators of each BS, simplifying the subsequent applica-
tion of clustering algorithms. The clustering algorithms were
used to group the BSs with similar performance as per their
PM values.
D. Extending Causal Reasoning with Active Inference
Active inference [13] is an extension of causal inference. It
is a concept originally from neuroscience which models how
the brain constantly predicts and evaluates sensory information
to decrease long-term surprise. “Surprise” of any observation
given a model is modeled as the negative log-likelihood of the
observation. Surprise is typically defined as so-called “Free
Energy” (FE), which is the gap between any observer’s un-
derstanding and the reality. The FE is usually modeled via the
Kullkack-Leibler (KL) divergence DKL between approximate
posterior probability ( Q) of hidden states ( x) and their exact
posterior probability ( P) (as shown in Equations 1 and 2)
reproduced from [13].
ℑ(o|m) =−ln P(o|m) (1)
F[Q, o] =DKL[Q(x)||P(x|o, m)] +ℑ(o|m) ≥ ℑ(o|m) (2)
Active inference agents work on action-perception cycles,
where (a) they predict the outcomes of their actions based
Fig. 9. Action Perception Cycle for Active Inference Agent - from [13]
on their beliefs, and (b) update their beliefs based on the
results of their actions. This works as depicted in Fig. 9.
First, the agent is given a set of expectations that it needs to
meet, for e.g., in our case, latency. The agent creates a causal
model (e.g., Fig. 8) to determine the factors that influence the
expectation. This is represented as a conditional probability
table that contains the degree to which the factors influence
the expectation in question. After this, the agent starts to
continuously evaluate the event against the expectation. To
decrease the Free Energy, the agent can: (1) adjust its beliefs
accordingly; (2) execute elasticity strategies; or (3) resolve the
contextual information to improve decision-making.
In our proposed meta-scheduling architecture as depicted
in Fig. 7, both prediction and belief updation would be
accomplished in the KBs of the CU and DU. Actions would
be implemented via the Decomposition and Actuation Agents,
while results of the actions would be obtained via the Report-
ing Agent.
Referring to Fig. 8, active inference-related actions could
therefore be limited to modifying variables such as distance,
Resource Block allocations, and Modulation and Coding
Schemes, in order to achieve the desired latency. And in the
perception phase of the action-perception cycle, the beliefs
(typically expressed as Bayesian probabilities) associated with
these variables would need to be adjusted based on the KL
divergence between the planned and actual latency values.
Scheduling decisions in 5G base stations (gNBs) usu-
ally depend on factors such as Radio Link Control (RLC)
buffer status, Block Error Rate (BLER) obtained by ACK or
NACK received from the physical (PHY) layer, and the actual
scheduling mechanism such as round robin or proportional
fair. These factors will help select the user to be served. After
that, the scheduler collects the buffered data from RLC and
sends it to PHY for transmission. This is pictorially depicted
in Fig. 10.
Once active inference is integrated into our architectural
framework, it can be used to speed up machine learning
algorithms used for resource scheduling and also make them
more accurate by only providing them data of the independent
Fig. 10. Working of Meta-scheduler with Schedulers
variables in the Markov Blankets of the dependent variables
which need to be optimized. Some recent examples of prior
work that can be considered, are:
• Meta-scheduling with cooperative learning [12]: a two-
layer meta-scheduling (at the CU level) and scheduling
framework (at the DU level) that uses cooperative learn-
ing between the two levels to optimize scheduling. It
proposes the use of Deep Reinforcement Learning at the
scheduling level, while meta-scheduling is implemented
via a meta-RL policy. In particular, the meta-RL policy
addressing problems with an identical task having differ-
ent system dynamics, as presented in [40] is employed.
• An example of an intent-driven closed loop management
for 6G O-RAN is presented in [23]. Its focus, however,
is on automating network slice management, although
it provides an intent decomposition model that can be
considered for incorporation into our meta-scheduling
framework. However, it only presents a single-layer
scheduling approach involving Deep Q-Learning, and
does not consider causal inference.
• It is increasingly seen in most wireless networks that
traditional offline learning approaches cannot adapt to
rapid changes in network conditions, which would be
expected in 5G/B5G networks. To that end, online learn-
ing techniques, in particular, multi-armed bandits are
becoming popular. One such example is presented in [41],
which describes a hierarchical multi-armed bandit tech-
nique for effective intent-based management. Similar to
our proposed two-layer framework, [41] proposes a two-
layer closed loop framework, where child agents in the
bottom layer are assigned specific intent key performance
indicators (KPIs) that they should meet. The child agent
then selects an action which is then evaluated by the
parent agent and the action with least pseudo-regret
(which quantifies the difference between the expected
reward achieved by the optimal and selected arms) is
selected by the parent agent. This, however, differs from
our approach in two ways. First, in our approach the CU
at the meta-scheduling layer would send a scheduling
policy along with the intent KPI, and the DU would be
free to evaluate and accept or modify it as per its situation.
Second, there is no concept of an action-perception cycle
in [41].
• An intent-driven orchestration method of cognitive au-
tonomous networks (CANs) for RAN management is
presented in [4]. That paper contains a high-level descrip-
tion of an end-to-end architecture for for intent-driven
management of RAN parameters within the CAN. It in-
troduces the concepts of Intent Specification Platform, an
Intent Fulfillment System, and an Intent-driven Network
Automation Function Orchestrator (IDNAFO). When our
meta-scheduling framework is to be implemented and
demonstrated, these three concepts can be incorporated
into it.
V. K EY RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Based on the above discussion, we identify the following
key research questions. This list is not necessarily exhaustive,
and we believe it would expand as the research questions
themselves begin to be investigated:
• Modeling-related: related to modeling the meta-
scheduling architectural framework, and the inference
algorithms for meta-scheduling and scheduling:
1) Methods for intent decomposition and assigning
the appropriate scheduling policies via the Meta-
Scheduling Coordinator. Intent decomposition could
be built on techniques such as those proposed in
works such as [11], [21]–[24].
2) Causal model discovery in programmable networks,
perhaps building on works such as [42]. One special
issue to contend with here, would be the size and
scale of the programmable network itself, which is
expected to be highly distributed and composed of
several administrative domains, which may impact
each other, especially at the time of intent decom-
position, as shown in [11]. As far as we are aware,
this problem remains unsolved.
3) Elasticity strategies as proposed in [13] to maintain
homeostasis, i.e., persistence of adherence to user
requirements over time. This is crucial to ensure
the continual adherence of the network to user
requirements, especially since such requirements are
expected to be dynamic.
4) Integration of active inference into any machine
learning algorithms employed to perform resource
scheduling. We expect that the meta-scheduling
layer in the CU would need to handle multiple
such algorithms being implemented at the same
time, and they would be heterogeneous. This hetero-
geneity would therefore require special techniques
to optimize meta-scheduling using active inference
over large numbers of instances of scheduling im-
plementations. This would also tie into the above
point of maintaining homeostasis in the midst of
such heterogeneity. Techniques from causal machine
learning [43], [44] would need to be investigated
here.
5) Since O-RAN is expected to be a key model
for programmable networks going forward to 5G
and beyond, several enhancements to O-RAN stan-
dards [25] would need to be investigated, which
include the following: intent-based management; O1
interface for Orchestration and Management (O-
RAN interfaces are depicted in Fig. 3); E2 interface
between nearRT-RIC and O-DU; as well as Fron-
thaul interfaces between O-DU and O-RU. All these
interfaces would need to be enhanced to incorporate
our meta-scheduling framework, including the meta-
scheduling layer at the CU, Meta-Scheduling Coor-
dinator that would exercise the E2 interface, and
the scheduling layer where the Fronthaul interfaces
would need to be incorporated.
• Implementation-related: related to implementation issues
facing the meta-scheduling framework:
1) How to actually implement the framework on large-
scale realistic 5G/B5G use cases, such as UA Vs,
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) [45], high-traffic ur-
ban networks in smart city deployments [46], and
possibly non-terrestrial deployments [47] as well.
2) How to address operational challenges and failure
scenarios, and how dynamic meta-scheduling can
help build resilience into resource scheduling [48].
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this position paper, we have introduced the key research
issue of managing programmable networks. In particular, we
have highlighted the problem of intent-based meta-scheduling
in such networks. We have shown how the principles of
active inference, derived from the well-known idea of causal
inference, can be used to model and manage a two-layer meta-
scheduling framework that can separate out the overall task of
managing the network in line with overall user requirements,
from the individual tasks of resource scheduling for meeting
specific intent KPIs. We concluded our paper by presenting
key research questions that need to be addressed in order to
make intent-based meta-scheduling a reality.
REFERENCES
[1] M. E. Haque, F. Tariq, M. R. Khandaker, K.-K. Wong, and Y . Zhang, “A
survey of scheduling in 5g urllc and outlook for emerging 6g systems,”
IEEE access, vol. 11, pp. 34 372–34 396, 2023.
[2] J. Niem ¨oller, J. Silvander, P. Stjernholm, L. Angelin, and U. Eriksson,
“Autonomous networks with multi-layer, intent-based operation,” Eric-
sson Technology Review, vol. 2023, no. 8, pp. 2–13, 2023.
[3] P. Szil ´agyi, “I2bn: Intelligent intent based networks,” Journal of ICT
Standardization, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 159–200, 2021.
[4] A. Banerjee, S. S. Mwanje, and G. Carle, “An intent-driven orchestration
of cognitive autonomous networks for ran management,” in 2021 17th
International Conference on Network and Service Management (CNSM).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 380–384.
[5] K. Mehmood, K. Kralevska, and D. Palma, “Intent-driven autonomous
network and service management in future cellular networks: A struc-
tured literature review,” Computer Networks, vol. 220, p. 109477, 2023.
[6] M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, S. Basagni, and T. Melodia, “Un-
derstanding o-ran: Architecture, interfaces, algorithms, security, and
research challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01032 , 2022.
[7] 23.501 3gpp spec: https://tinyurl.com/552e3jdn.
[8] 38.300 3gpp spec: https://tinyurl.com/muw8fytt.
[9] 38.413 3gpp spec: https://tinyurl.com/5f4dpxw9.
[10] V . Fulber-Garcia, F. Engel, and E. P. Duarte, “A genetic scheduling
strategy with spatial reuse for dense wireless networks,” International
Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems , no. Preprint, pp. 1–15, 2024.
[11] F. Christou, “Decentralized intent-driven coordination of multi-domain
ip-optical networks,” in 2022 18th International Conference on Network
and Service Management (CNSM) , 2022, pp. 359–363.
[12] K. Min, Y . Kim, and H.-S. Lee, “Meta-scheduling framework with
cooperative learning toward beyond 5g,”IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1810–1824, 2023.
[13] B. Sedlak, V . C. Pujol, P. K. Donta, and S. Dustdar, “Active inference
on the edge: A design study,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference
on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops and other
Affiliated Events (PerCom Workshops). IEEE, 2024, pp. 550–555.
[14] V . Casamayor Pujol, B. Sedlak, Y . Xu, P. K. Donta, and S. Dustdar,
“Deepslos for the computing continuum,” in Proceedings of the 2024
Workshop on Advanced Tools, Programming Languages, and PLatforms
for Implementing and Evaluating algorithms for Distributed systems ,
2024, pp. 1–10.
[15] J. Pearl, M. Glymour, and N. P. Jewell, Causal inference in statistics:
A primer. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[16] M. A. Habib, H. Zhou, P. E. Iturria-Rivera, M. Elsayed, M. Bavand,
R. Gaigalas, Y . Ozcan, and M. Erol-Kantarci, “Intent-driven intelligent
control and orchestration in o-ran via hierarchical reinforcement learn-
ing,” in 2023 IEEE 20th International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc
and Smart Systems (MASS) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 55–61.
[17] H. Erdol, X. Wang, P. Li, J. D. Thomas, R. Piechocki, G. Oikonomou,
R. Inacio, A. Ahmad, K. Briggs, and S. Kapoor, “Federated meta-
learning for traffic steering in o-ran,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05874
[18] Intent in autonomous networks v1.3.0 (ig1253):
https://www.tmforum.org/resources/introductory-guide/ig1253-intent-in-
autonomous-networks-v1-3-0/.
[19] P. Szil ´agyi, “I2bn: Intelligent intent based networks,” Journal of ICT
Standardization, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 159–200, 2021.
[20] Ericsson’s ai-powered intent-based operations to deliver 5g pre-
mium services; https://www.ericsson.com/en/news/2024/2/ericssons-ai-
powered-intent-based-operations-deliver-premium-5g-services.
[21] A. Kattepur, S. K. Mohalik, I. Burdick, M. Orlic, and L. Mokrushin,
“CONRAD: cognitive intent driven 5g network slice planning
and design,” in Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on AI-ML Systems, AIMLSystems 2023, Bangalore, India, October
25-28, 2023 . ACM, 2023, pp. 23:1–23:8. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3639856.3639879
[22] Y . Wang, Y . Yu, Y . Li, D. Li, X. Zhao, and C. Yang, “Network
intent decomposition and optimization for energy-aware radio access
network,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18386
[23] J. Zhang, C. Yang, R. Dong, Y . Wang, A. Anpalagan, Q. Ni, and
M. Guizani, “Intent-driven closed-loop control and management frame-
work for 6g open ran,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2023.
[24] N. Gritli, F. Khendek, and M. Toeroe, “Decomposition and propagation
of intents for network slice design,” in 2021 IEEE 4th 5G World Forum
(5GWF), 2021, pp. 165–170.
[25] O-ran specifications : https://specifications.o-ran.org/specifications.
[26] Intent manager capability profiles v1.0.0 (ig1253d):
https://www.tmforum.org/resources/how-to-guide/ig1253d-intent-
manager-capability-profiles-v1-0-0/.
[27] Y .-G. Hsieh, F. Iutzeler, J. Malick, and P. Mertikopoulos, “Multi-
agent online optimization with delays: Asynchronicity, adaptivity, and
optimism,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 23, no. 78, pp.
1–49, 2022.
[28] A. Thantharate and C. Beard, “Adaptive6g: Adaptive resource man-
agement for network slicing architectures in current 5g and future 6g
systems,” Journal of Network and Systems Management , vol. 31, no. 1,
p. 9, 2023.
[29] M. Corici, R. Modroiu, F. Eichhorn, E. Troudt, and T. Magedanz,
“Towards efficient conflict mitigation in the converged 6g open ran
control plane,” Annals of Telecommunications, pp. 1–11, 2024.
[30] S. Skaperas, N. Ferdosian, A. Chorti, and L. Mamatas, “Scheduling
optimization of heterogeneous services by resolving conflicts,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.01897, 2021.
[31] R. Kumar, D. Sinwar, and V . Singh, “Qos aware resource allocation for
coexistence mechanisms between embb and urllc: Issues, challenges,
and future directions in 5g,” Computer Communications, 2023.
[32] A. Prado, F. St ¨ockeler, F. Mehmeti, P. Kr ¨amer, and W. Kellerer,
“Enabling proportionally-fair mobility management with reinforcement
learning in 5g networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Commu-
nications, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1845–1858, 2023.
[33] Tr290b intent common model – intent reporting v3.0.0:
https://tinyurl.com/5c2e2kwp.
[34] S. D’Oro, M. Polese, L. Bonati, H. Cheng, and T. Melodia, “dapps:
Distributed applications for real-time inference and control in o-ran,”
IEEE Communications Magazine , vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 52–58, 2022.
[35] C. K. Thomas, C. Chaccour, W. Saad, M. Debbah, and C. S. Hong,
“Causal reasoning: Charting a revolutionary course for next-generation
ai-native wireless networks,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine ,
2024.
[36] D. M. Manias, A. Chouman, and A. Shami, “Model drift in dynamic
networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 78–84,
2023.
[37] M. Kirchhoff, T. Parr, E. Palacios, K. Friston, and J. Kiverstein, “The
markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy
principle,” Journal of The royal society interface , vol. 15, no. 138, p.
20170792, 2018.
[38] I. Tsamardinos, C. F. Aliferis, A. R. Statnikov, and E. Statnikov,
“Algorithms for large scale markov blanket discovery.” in FLAIRS,
vol. 2, 2003, pp. 376–81.
[39] M. Sousa, P. Vieira, M. Queluz, and A. Rodrigues, “Enhancing ro-
bustness for automated mobile network optimization by uncovering
causal relationships,” in 2024 19th International Symposium on Wireless
Communication Systems (ISWCS) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[40] H.-S. Lee, “System-agnostic meta-learning for mdp-based dynamic
scheduling via descriptive policy,” in International Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 2022, pp. 169–187.
[41] E. Karakaya, O. Ercetin, H. Ozkan, M. Karaca, E. D. Biyar, and
A. Palaios, “Online learning for autonomous management of intent-
based 6g networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17767 , 2024.
[42] M. Sousa, P. Vieira, M. P. Queluz, and A. Rodrigues, “Towards the use
of unsupervised causal learning in wireless networks operation,” Journal
of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences , vol. 35,
no. 9, p. 101764, 2023.
[43] J. Kaddour, A. Lynch, Q. Liu, M. J. Kusner, and R. Silva, “Causal
machine learning: a survey and open problems (2022),” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.15475, 2022.
[44] A. Roy, S. Banerjee, J. Sadasivan, A. Sarkar, and S. Dey, “Causality-
driven reinforcement learning for joint communication and sensing,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.15329
[45] A. Alalewi, I. Dayoub, and S. Cherkaoui, “On 5g-v2x use cases and
enabling technologies: A comprehensive survey,” Ieee Access , vol. 9,
pp. 107 710–107 737, 2021.
[46] S. A. Ali, S. A. Elsaid, A. A. Ateya, M. ElAffendi, and A. A. A.
El-Latif, “Enabling technologies for next-generation smart cities: A
comprehensive review and research directions,” Future Internet, vol. 15,
no. 12, p. 398, 2023.
[47] M. Majamaa, “Toward multi-connectivity in beyond 5g non-terrestrial
networks: Challenges and possible solutions,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, 2024.
[48] L. De Simone, M. Di Mauro, R. Natella, and F. Postiglione, “Perfor-
mance and availability challenges in designing resilient 5g architectures,”
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , 2024.
[49] B. C. Chatterjee, N. Sarma, and E. Oki, “Routing and spectrum
allocation in elastic optical networks: A tutorial,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1776–1800, 2015.
APPENDIX A
INTENT DECOMPOSITION METHOD FROM [11]
A. Description of [11]
The intent decomposition approach in [11] has been devel-
oped for IP-optical networks, although its approach is general
enough for any 5G/B5G wireless network. The emphasis of the
approach in [11] is decentralized coordination using multiple
SDN controllers, as depicted in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11. Decentralized Coordination of Intent-based Networks - from [11]
Fig. 12 illustrates the various intent stages as per [11].
First the intent enters the system expressed in an intent
language. The intent language engine uses the IBN NBI to
insert the intent into the IBN framework (Intent Delivery).
The IBN framework processes the intent, generates a potential
implementation (Intent Compilation), and forwards it to the
SDN Controller to be deployed in the required devices (Intent
Installation). The performance of intent fulfillment is continu-
ously monitored (Intent Monitoring). Any conflict arising out
of satisfying multiple intents at the same time should also be
addressed, although that is outside the scope of [11].
Fig. 12. IBN over SDN architecture - from [11]
The intent state machine is depicted in Fig. 13. To get
installed, an intent must first be compiled. Compiling and
Installing are intermediate steps that signify dependence on the
child intents in the intent tree. Compiling and installation will
fail if resources are unavailable or if the intent requirements
are not satisfied.
Hence the work in [11] is based on the concept of intent
tree, whose root is the received intent. Each intent can be
broken down into sub-intents and can be considered installed
Fig. 13. Intent State Machine - from [11]
when all children are all installed. This triggers updates to
the parent’s state based on the child’s state. Failure states of
children are propagated to the ancestors, who can decide to
take the appropriate actions, i.e., try to address the failure or
recompile the intent. This process is depicted in more detail
in Fig. 14.
The paper [11] considers only best-effort connectivity in-
tents, with correspond to the Routing and Spectrum Assign-
ment (RSA) problem [49]. Since RSA is NP-Hard, it is split
into (1) routing and (2) spectrum allocation subproblems.
The strategy employed in [11] assigns a PathIntent for every
ConnectivityIntent to solve the routing subproblem, and a
SpectrumIntent to solve the spectrum allocation subproblem.
Scaling to multi-domain networks (MD) is done via the use
of a RemoteIntent, which delegates an intent to another domain
by binding the local intent to a new replica on the remote
domain with a parent-child relationship. The state update
properties still hold here like any parent-child relationship in
the intent tree. This way, the intent states can propagate across
multiple administrative domains.
Fig. 15 illustrates a prototype implementation of the above
ideas, where the intent trees are generated while issuing to
IBN1 a MD ConnectivityIntent between nodes 1:2 and 3:6
with 5 ms latency and 75 Gbps bandwidth requirements. Node
x.y signifies the y − th node of the x − th IBN domain.
Overall, the IBN1 compiled the intent by subdividing it into
two ConnectivityIntents, one implemented locally while the
other delegated to the neighboring domain. The current intent
compilation strategy performs signal regeneration in the IP
layer at every border node, i. e., nodes 2:1 and 3:2. The
selection of the border nodes and the neighboring domain
is based on the specifics of the deployed implementation
algorithm, i. e., the operator’s decision-making process.
It is observed that PathIntents and SpectrumIntents compile
down to low-level intents, i.e., NodeRouterIntents requesting
IP router ports and NodeSpectrumIntent pairs requesting fiber
spectrum slots for each node participating in the link. However,
the IBN instance cannot control the neighboring domain for
the inter-domain links, and a BorderIntent is generated instead,
Fig. 14. Intent State Propagation in case of a Network Fault - from [11]
creating remote low-level intents for the border nodes. For
example, to use the link between 1:9 and 2:1, the frequency
slots 5; 6; 7; 8; 9 must be allocated at nodes 1:9 and 2:1.
IBN1 creates a NodeSpectrumIntent for the local node 1:9
and a BorderIntent that will issue a RemoteIntent to IBN2 for
2:1.
It is also noticed that constraints are propagated altered to
the child intents, depending on whether they are guaranteed
to be already (partly) satisfied by the parents or not. For
example, the latency constraint of 5 ms is propagated to one
of the child intents as a constraint of 1 ms. This means the
parent guarantees that the intent constraint of 5 ms will be
satisfied as long as the child satisfies the intent constraint
of 1 ms. The PathIntent can decide if the delay constraint
is satisfied since it knows the path. If it is satisfied, there
is no reason to propagate the constraint further down to the
child intents. If it is not satisfied, then the intent state will
transition to CompileFailed. If it is generally unknown whether
the constraint is satisfied, the intent will transfer the constraint
to the child intents unaltered.
When all the IBN instances successfully compile and install
the system-generated intents, the end-to-end (E2E) connection
will be available. If one of the IBN instances does not stand
up to the requirements of an intent, this will be spotted from
the monitoring procedure, which will update the state of the
corresponding intent to InstallFailed, making it clear whom
to hold responsible. Such monitoring promotes accountability
and conformity with the intent requirements.
B. Analysis of [11]
The paper [11] presents an overview of how intents could
be decomposed, and how the decomposition can be managed
to ensure intent fulfillment. While we have cited many other
intent decomposition methods from the literature [22]–[24],
the key aspect of [11] is its treatment of intent decomposition
across multiple administrative domains, which would be a key
feature of programmable networks.
Fig. 15. Multi-domain intent deployment and the intent tree - from [11]