Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired
by Serotonergic Modulation Using Active
Inference
B
Filip Novicky1( ), Joshua Offergeld2, Simon Janssen2, and Pablo Lanillos2,3
1 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior,
Department of Neurophysics, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
filip.novicky@donders.ru.nl
2 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior,
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Radboud University,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
3 Cajal International Center for Neuroscience,
Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Madrid, Spain
Abstract. Whenfacedwithuncertaintyintheworld,biologicalagents
actively sense the environment to acquire the most informative input
to fulfil their tasks. Actions are performed to adjust bodily sensors to
maximize the collected information, which is usually known as active
sensing. For instance, rodents continuously adjust the speed and ampli-
tude of whisking to better identify objects and body location in space,
which ultimately regulates navigation. Whilst, the internal mechanism
that drives active sensing in humans is still under research, recent evi-
dencepointstowardsneuromodulators,suchasserotonin,thatinfluence
whether the habitual behaviour is preferred over sensor adjustments to
triggerexploration.Here,wepresentanactivetactile-sensingmodelfora
robot inspired by the serotonergic function viewed from the uncertainty
minimization perspective. To mechanistically explain this neuromodu-
latory function, we associated it with precision parameters regulating
habitual behaviour and tactile encoding based on previous findings. We
qualitatively evaluated the model using an experiment inspired by the
gap-crossing paradigm but tailored to a humanoid with tactile sensing.
Behaviouralswitchtimingresultsshowthestrongdependenciesbetween
active sensing and precision regulation. Ultimately, this work discusses
how the neural microcircuitry regulates active sensing, hence opening
futureresearchofsuchneuromodulatoryprocessestranslatedtorobotics
active sensing and perception.
· · ·
Keywords: Active Sensing Active Perception Active Inference
· ·
Serotonin Precision Neurorobotics
F. Novicky, J. Offergeld and S. Janssen—Contributed equally to this work and share
the first authorship.
(cid:2)c TheAuthor(s)2023
F.Mederetal.(Eds.):LivingMachines2023,LNAI14157,pp.33–55,2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38857-6_3
34 F. Novicky et al.
1 Introduction
Perception is not passive. Biological agents actively explore the world by select-
ing such actions that inform them about the world, given their embodied con-
straints.Whilstthisactivesensingprocessisnotyetfullyunderstood(Bajcsyet
al.2018;Meeraetal.2022),recentfindingsinneurosciencepointtoneuromodu-
lators,suchasserotonin,tobestronglyinvolved.Inhumans,serotoninhasbeen
suggested to be involved in the sensitivity of sensory processing (Homberg et al.
2016)andperceptualdecisionmaking—bytrackingsensoryuncertainty(Banget
al.2020).Butregardingactivesensingarevealingstudycomesfromexploratory
functions of rodents (Azarfar et al. 2019), where it has been shown that while
wildtyperodents,withnormallevelsofserotonin,showaswitchfromalargeto
asmallamplitudeoftheirwhiskerswhentheytouchanobject—toacquiremore
information—, rodents with altered levels of serotonin (i.e., knock-out serotonin
mice, SERT-/-) do not present this behaviour. This may mean that SERT-/-
rodents have their active sensing mechanism turned off. We suggest that the
changes in the exploratory behaviour can be understood as an uncertainty min-
imization strategy that is triggered by switching to a more efficient mode of
collecting data under higher uncertainty.
We hypothesize that abnormal active sensing behaviour can be accounted
for through aberrant precision modulation (i.e., broadly inverse covariance) in
two ways: modulating incoming sensory input (via reducing sensory precision)
or modulating habitual behaviours (increasing habitual precision). The sensory
precision dictates how accurately a stimulus will be encoded in the brain and
how much information it provides for an apt inference. Habitual precision, on
the other hand, modulates habits that are selected a priori without considering
current input (Miller et al. 2019). Habits have the advantages that they do not
require the complex computations of policy selection. Hence, we suggest that
properprecisionmodulationisatthecoreofproducingactivesensingbehaviour.
Here, we present a robotic active perception computational model inspired
bytheserotonin-basedactivesensingobservedinrodents.Ourworkfollowsfrom
previousresearchonactivesensingwhere–fromthecomputationalpointofview
– this behaviour relates to uncertainty minimization or information gain maxi-
mization (Yang et al. 2016; Martinez-Hernandez et al. 2017; Parr et al. 2021).
Ourmodelthusextendsonthesetheoriesviaprovidingprecisionparametersasa
neuromodulatory function that regulates this behaviour—see (Parr and Friston
2017; Parr et al. 2022).
While rodents active sensing differs from human tactile sensing, there are
some relevant connections, such as how tactile information is obtained through
habitual versus exploratory behaviours. Disentangling this mechanism may pro-
videanewdirectionintactileactiveperception,particularlyinroboticsapplica-
tions, such as navigation (Rasouli et al. 2020) and object recognition (Kaboli et
al. 2017). Besides, our model can be specifically used to translate its theoretical
findings into animal or human behaviour via the deployment of the model in a
humanoid robot.
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 35
Hence, to validate the model, we deployed the model on a humanoid robot
and designed an exploration experiment inspired by rodent navigation via the
so-called gap-crossing paradigm (Voigts et al. 2008). The humanoid robot relies
only on somatosensory (tactile) data with a broad movement amplitude (i.e.,
randomly moving robot’s hands in the air) to maximize the range of where the
stimulationcancomefrom.Activesensingisthenconsideredwhenasmallrange
of movement around a more informative stimulus is selected. This is consistent
with previous computational models that understand active sensing as informa-
tion gain behaviour (Yang et al. 2016; Parr et al. 2021). We found that optimal
levels of precision lead to more informative behaviour, while dysregulations of
these move the agent to suboptimal behaviour where information gained from
an object are missed, causing an agent to be ignorant about the environment.
Thus, indicating the strong connection between precision modulation and opti-
mal active sensing behaviours. The specific contribution of our model lies in
applying the uncertainty minimization perspective in active tactile-sensing, and
its demonstration in a humanoid.
2 Methods
OurmodelisgroundedontheActiveInference(Fristonetal.2017)(AIF)math-
ematical framework—see (Lanillos et al. 2021) for a survey on robotic applica-
tions. Particularly, we used the discrete state space AIF to model the robot’s
behaviour. Thus, we first briefly describe active inference and then the model
used for active sensing.
Fig.1.General factor graph of the POMDP behind the discrete active inference model
of the agent. On the left panel, the equations specify the generative model. The gen-
erative model is thus a joint probability of outcomes, states, and model parameters.
Therightpanelshowsthegraphicalrepresentationofthesamegenerativemodel.This
figure has been adapted from (Friston et al. 2017). The terms o, s, π and τ refer to
outcomes, hidden states, policies, and time-steps respectively. Model parameters are
labeledasA,B andE whichrelatestolikelihoodandtransitionmatrices,andahabit-
ual vector, respectively. Lastly, Cat(.) specifies a categorical distribution, and σ is a
softmax function.
36 F. Novicky et al.
2.1 Agent Model
We modelled the agent dynamics and action selection using the discrete
Partially-Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) formalism. The
POMDP structure provides a mapping from outcomes to hidden states, and
across time-steps, referring to likelihood and transition functions. The structure
is specified in Fig.1. The agent has a hidden state s that evolves through time
depending on the transition function B and is updated given the observation o
at each time step. The agent has a mapping (likelihood) of observations given
the state.
2.2 Active Inference
ActionselectionismodelledundertheAIFmathematicalframework,acorollary
theory of the free energy principle. The free energy principle assumes that all
living systems follow a simple process of self-organization which is to minimize
the surprisal value (Friston 2010). Variational free energy (F) then works as an
upper-bound on this value (Friston et al. 2017):
F ≥−lnP(o) (1)
where F is the free energy, o denotes outcomes or input data and P(o) repre-
sents the surprisal in probabilistic terms. This equation states that minimizing
the free energy minimizes the surprisal as well (Oliver et al. 2021). The rea-
son we do not minimize the surprisal directly is due to its intractability when
scaling beyond very low-dimensional distributions (Da Costa et al. 2020). The
variational free energy bound combats this mathematical pit via the use of vari-
ational inference (Blei et al. 2017), an approximate Bayesian inference that uses
an approximate distribution Q of the generative model’s distribution P. The
variational free energy can be defined as:
F =D [Q(s)||P(s)]−E (lnP(o|s)) (2)
(cid:2) KL (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:2)Q(s) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:5)
Complexity Accuracy
where s denotes the hidden state of the system, D is the Kullback-Leibler
KL
divergence that measures the distance between two distributions and E is
Q(s)
theexpectationoftheobservationlikelihoodgiventheapproximatedistribution.
Equation2 shows that the free energy is at its minimum in case where both the
complexity andaccuracytermareequaltozero.Thecomplexity termcompares
the approximate posterior distribution Q(s) with the model’s prior distribution
P(s). This value is minimized when the model’s prior knowledge only explains
the new stimulation forming the posterior. The accuracy term assures the agent
of inferring those (hidden) states that can explain the stimuli o the most. It
is computed by averaging over the posterior approximate distribution Q(s) the
likelihood function of the model. Without the complexity term, the accuracy
would lead to observations overfitting, and without the accuracy term the agent
wouldignoretheoutsideworldandfocusonthemodel’sbeliefswithoutupdating
them. Hence, free energy is a balance of exploitation (i.e., fulfilling our priors)
and exploration (i.e., inferring the most informative hidden states).
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 37
Action Selection. We define the agent’s action selection as computing the
optimal policy π, given the combination of the habitual behaviours E1 (i.e. a
behaviour occurring automatically, without a complex inference) and the opti-
mization of the Expected Free Energy (G) of executing a plan of actions in the
future2:
(cid:6) (cid:7)
π =argmax Q(π)=argmax σ ρlnE(π)−G(π) (3)
whereρistheprecisionparameterthatmodulatestheinterplaybetweenhabitual
policies and new computed optimal policies, given the model and new observa-
tions. The σ represents a softmax function that in a discrete state representa-
tiontransformstheobjectivevaluesintoprobabilities.Thus,thepolicywiththe
higher probability is selected.
To enable the agent to plan actions ahead (Lanillos et al. 2021), we used
the Expected Free Energy (EFE) objective function G, which predicts the free
energy value in the next time-point (Kaplan and Friston 2018):
G(π)= (cid:2) D KL [Q(s τ(cid:3) | (cid:4) π)||P(s τ ) (cid:5) ]−E (cid:2)Q(sτ|π)P(oτ|sτ(cid:3)) [ (cid:4) ln P(o τ |s τ ,A) (cid:5) ] (4)
Risk Ambiguity
where π is a policy/plan (i.e. a sequence of actions), τ is a time point, and A
represents the likelihood function of the model. The terms risk and ambiguity
closely follow the terms complexity and accuracy from Eq.2, respectively. A
relevantdifferencebetweenthefreeenergyF andGisthatthelatterissampled
from the predictive posterior distribution. This means that the agent predicts
the consequences of its actions and calculates the deviance from surprise based
on these. The risk calculates the posterior value of a hidden state in the next
time-step, given a policy selected at a given moment that is compared to the
prior beliefs of the agent. This assures a selection of such a policy that leads to
fulfilling the priors. On the other hand, the ambiguity term functions similarly
to the accuracy termmentioned above, butthe likelihood is predictive (over the
next time step) based on the averaged approximate distribution of an expected
hiddenstategivenapolicyQ(s |π).Thismeansthattheambiguitytermselects
τ
those policies that are most informative.
1 E can be provided by the designer or learned and encodes the agent’s preferences
given by evolution.
2 Note that the EFE is a generalization of the variational free energy conditioned on
an action plan or policy.
38 F. Novicky et al.
2.3 Precision Modulation
Asdescribedintheintroduction,wesuggestthatactivesensingismodulatedby
neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, which we assimilate to sensory precision
or habitual precision. Sensoryprecision modulates the likelihood function of the
model, while the habitual precision modulates policy selection (through EFE
computation).
Likelihood Modulation. Sensory precision ζ modulates the impact of the
sensory input.
A=σ(ζln(A+(cid:7))) (5)
where σ represents a softmax function, and (cid:7) is some arbitrary small number
that prevents a mathematical error due to taking a logarithm of 0. The bold
matrix A denotes a distribution shown in Fig.2 (shown in the middle panel)
and represents the likelihood mapping between states and observations. Since
only those columns linked to tactile sensing have a non-uniform distribution,
the equation above then implicitly modulates only these columns, as the inverse
temperature parameter ζ cannot modulate the uniform distribution.
Policy Selection Modulation. The habitual precision parameter ρ is
described in Eq.3 of action selection. The E vector prespecifies a preference
over the habitual policy, and thus the precision parameter can only minimize or
maximize the difference, but not shift it around and make a habitual preference
for a small movement policy. High ρ thus indicates a strong preference for the
broadrangeofmovement,whilelowρmakesthehabitualpreferencesdisappear.
2.4 Model Tailored to Robotic Tactile Active Sensing
Our active sensing model is described in Fig.2. Inspired by the gap-crossing
paradigm in rodents (Voigts et al. 2008), we designed the robotic model with
two hidden factors, which describe the state: object appearance (or context)
andarmposition.Theformerhiddenfactorissplitintofourstates.Threestates
(indicated with black, grey, and white boxes) reflect three different positions of
wheretheobjectcanbedetected.Thefourthhiddenstateassumesthatnoobject
canbedetected.Forthehiddenfactorarmposition,wespecifyfivedifferentarm
positions. Note the three middle positions are duplicated so we can provide a
backandforthmovementinadiscretespace,asmuchasinwhiskingmovement.
Therefore, the arm positions are represented by eight different states. There is
oneoutcomemodalityinthemodel,whichisassociatedwithtouch.Theoutcome
istheneitherbeingtouchedornot.Followingtheoutcomemodalitiesandhidden
states, we can provide likelihood functions, specifying the probability of being
touched, given a specific context and arm position. If the agent infers that there
is no stimulus around, the likelihood function is completely uniform and thus
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 39
Fig.2. The generative model of active sensing in the Nao humanoid. The model con-
tains two hidden factors: object appearance and arm position. The former indicates
where the object will appear in the environment, defined by the arm position. There
are three objects that can be linked to three distinct arm positions, and also a case
when there is no object which is what the agent believes at the beginning of every
trial.Next,thereare5armpositions,wherethemiddlethreepositionsareduplicated
due to the sinewave-like behaviour (i.e., going back and forth). There is only one out-
comemodality,touch,whichtakesabooleanvalueofeithertouchedoruntouched.The
likelihood matrices depend on what context (i.e., object appearance) is inferred. We
defined the likelihood function A in an uncertainty-minimization environment, where
the motivation for the agent to explore an object (where the stimulation is sensed) is
defined by a uniform likelihood distribution except for the part where the hand can
senseanobject.Inthematrix,theblackcolourrelatestohighprobability,whilewhite
boxes are of low probability. The grey boxes represent uncertain distribution. Lastly,
we specified two policies. The first one, which has a higher habitual value, is related
to a complete hand circle which is a logical way of exploring the (uncertain) world
as fully as possible. The second policy provides some nuances on how to escape the
former policy and stick with the most certain outcome related to a given arm posi-
tion. This policy has a lower habitual value and therefore its selection depends on the
uncertainty minimization behaviour. These actions are then derived from transition
matrices B specified in Fig.1.
40 F. Novicky et al.
uninformative3.Thisisprovidedasapriorforthemodelatthebeginningofevery
trial.Next,thethreepositionsinwhichanobjectcanappearareassociatedwith
distinct arm positions (i.e. an agent can only infer that there is an object in a
position when the arm is in that same position). These likelihood distributions
then provide a preciselikelihood distribution only over the adequate association
oftheobject’sappearanceandarmposition.Notethattheseexactdistributions
are then modulated with the ζ precision parameter provided in Eq.5. Lastly,
the policies (or actions) are split into two. The former one (indicated in yellow
colour in the figure) is related to the large movement amplitude. This policy
has a higher habitual value in the vector E, as we assume that the bigger hand
movementsshouldbemoreintuitive.Thesmallamplitudeofthehandmovement
isindicatedbythepurplecolour.Thispolicyassuresthepossibilityofswitching
to the smaller, more precise, movements, that are then related to active sensing
strategies.Thebehaviourfortheswitchistofindthemostcertainlyinterpretable
outcome and stick with it, hence uncertainty minimizing behaviour.
2.5 Experimental Design
The model was validated in the humanoid Nao robot (NAO the humanoid and
programmable robot — Aldebaran, n.d.) using an object exploration experiment
using one limb, inspired by the rodents navigation paradigm. The goal of the
robot is to explore the environment looking for objects. Once the robot infers
there is an object in a given position by sensing the object with the touch
sensor, we expect a switch in behaviour from broad movement amplitude to
small movement amplitude as it will start minimizing the uncertainty over a
more certain input. In other words, the big movement amplitude is used when
the environment is more uncertain and all inputs are equally uncertain. The
objectprovidesmorecertaintytotheagent,henceitmakessensethattheagent
will stay around more certain inputs with a small movement amplitude.
To test distinct tactile exploratory processes under precision modulation,
we conducted experiments in which a Nao robot moves its arm back and forth
as hard-coded based on our model (see Fig.2). The experiments contain 40
time-steps (with one exception of 80 time-steps), where a time step is sim-
ply defined by an arm position. Hence, during a single experiment, the robot
moves its arm 40 times. Each time-step takes approximately 2.5s (communica-
tion speed between the robot and the host computer and the robot physically
3 It might seem counter-intuitive that without any stimulation, the agent does not
recognizethatnothinghasbeentouched,butratherincreasestheuncertaintyofthe
world. This is motivated by the so-called dark room problem (Friston et al. 2012;
Baltieri and Buckley 2019) that resolves a problem in the free energy that states
that, if agents minimize the uncertainty of the world, why not stay in completely
darkenvironmentswhichshouldprovidecompletelypredictablestimuli(i.e.,always
dark)? The answer is that perceiving darkness is highly ambiguous, therefore we
treat no stimulation in the same way and build likelihood matrices in such a way
that increases uncertainty over sensing no-stimulation signals while the stimulation
outcomes provide higher certainty of causes.
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 41
moving between two states), which means that running an experiment takes
approximately one minute and forty-five seconds. The Nao robot will always
startwiththefirstarmposition.Afterthe8thtime-step,weintroduceanobject
(the researcher’s hand) at a specific arm position.
2.6 Implementation
Toimplement the modelthat wedescribedinSect.2.1,we usedtheopen-source
‘pymdp’ package (Heins et al. 2022). This software implements active inference
agentsindiscretetime,state,andactionspaces.Totranslatethemodelintothe
physical Nao robot we used the NAOqi driver. Thus, we developed the interface
between the NAOqi SDK and the pymdp algorithm to control the robot. Since
the NAOqi software only runs on Python 2.7 and the python model needs to be
implementedinPython3becauseofthepymdplibrary,weimplementedasocket
module to communicate observations from the physical robot to the model and
the actions from the model to the robot.
Fig.3. Illustrations of the Nao robot used for the experiments. a) A particular arm
position of the Nao robot in the experiment. The red dots indicate all states of the
robot, where the most right arm position is referred to as arm position 1 and the
most left arm position is referred to as arm position 5. The darker red line indicates
the trajectory between arm positions and the dots indicate a movement down and up
againtosensetheenvironment.b)Thelocationofthetouchsensoronthebackofthe
robot’srighthandindicatedbyaredcircle.Thetouchsensorisacapacitivesensorthat
can distinguish between two different states: touched and not touched. (Color figure
online)
Furthermore, the acting and sensing computations of the robot were subdi-
videdintoparallelthreadstoallowtherobottosamplefasterintheenvironment
when moving the arm down and up in a particular state, thereby increasing the
probabilitythatatouchisobserved.Theactingthreadwasresponsibleformov-
ing the robot’s arm and for interacting with the model script. To move the
42 F. Novicky et al.
robot’sarm,weusedthemotionmoduleoftheNaorobot(ALMotion)toaccess
the joints of the robot’s right shoulder. In accordance with the model, five arm
positions have to be specified and the three middle positions have to be dupli-
cated, so the robot can move back and forth between states in discrete space
(see Fig.3a)4. When the right hand arrives in a new state, it will slightly move
down(0.1radvertically)inordertosensewhetherthereisanobjectinthestate.
Afterward, it will move up again and continue to the next state.
The sensing thread was responsible for registering whether the touch sensor
of the robot is touched and updating the variables in the script accordingly. To
registeratouch,weusedatouchsensoronthebackoftherobot’srighthand.In
particular,weonlyusedthemiddletouchsensoronthebackoftherobot’shand,
which is a capacitive sensor with a binary output (touched or not touched) (see
Fig.3b for the location of this touch sensor in red). The touch sensor is always
facing down (angle is 1.74rad) (see Fig.3a for the positioning of the hand in a
particular state). By accessing the memory of the Nao robot (ALMemory) and
reading out the value for the back touch sensor on the right hand, we could
infer whether the sensor was touched (value is 1) or not (value is 0)5. Because
reading from memory is very costly, we introduced locks in our solution to only
read from memory when the robot’s hand moves up and down in a state and
not when moving between different states.
In general, the communication between the two scripts proceeded as follows:
first, the acting thread read whether the robot is touched in the previous state
and sent this observation to the model. The model subsequently computed the
next action for the robot to execute and sent this action to the acting thread.
This thread then moved to the next state, based on the action. Afterward, it
moved the hand down and up again in this next state, while the sensing thread
simultaneously read from memory whether or not the touch sensor on the robot
wastouched.Ifthesensorwastouched,thethreadwouldupdatethesharedvari-
ablestoringthetouchvalueaccordingly,suchthatthisobservationwasavailable
fortheactingthreadinthenexttimestep.Detailedinformationonthesoftware
implementation can be found in Fig.7, Appendix A.1.
3 Results
First,basedonobservationsfromthesimulations,weevaluatedbehaviouraland
perceptual differences depending on the precision modulation parameter (ζ and
ρ)valuesthatarethehypothesizedhomologuesofserotonergicneuromodulation
and that affects active sensing behaviour. Second, based on the simulations we
introduced a qualitative analysis studying the robot NAO behaviour with low
and high ζ values, combined with low and high ρ values.
4 Note that the movement of the robot’s arm is only horizontal. Therefore, we could
fixthejointpositionoftheshoulderpitchto0.1rad.Fortheshoulderroll,wechose
toevenlyspacethejointpositionsbetween0.2and−1.0rad,suchthattheshoulder
roll has to move 0.3rad between states.
5 We also used the speech module of the Nao robot (ALTextToSpeech) to have an
auditory cue which could indicate whether the sensor was touched.
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 43
3.1 Simulations
Weanalyzedtheexperimentinsimulationfor13differentζ valuesand13differ-
ent ρ values, selected to capture the whole range of potential behaviours. All of
theexperimentsfollowedthestructureasdescribedabove,meaning40time-steps
per experiment, where after the 8th time step we simulated object appearance
at arm position 4. We thus ran 169 (13×13) experiments, 8 times each. Note
that for the simulated experiments, the starting arm position is randomized.
These experiments show numerical differences in tactile exploratory behaviour
underdistinctprecisionmodulation.Specifically,wefocusedoni)thetimewhen
the (behavioural) switch from a large to small hand movement amplitude; and
ii) the switch of the object appearance posterior occurs after introducing the
object.
Fig.4. Numerical analyses of the active sensing behaviour. Figure (a) represents a
time delay of behaviour switch. Figure (b) shows a time delay of inferred contextual
switch. Based on these analyses, we decided to simulate four precision combination
in the humanoid that are represented in the dashed green squares in both heatmaps.
(Color figure online)
Figure4a represents the time it takes to switch from a large to a small hand
movement amplitude from the moment an object has been touched. Here, we
can see that the increase of ζ and decrease of ρ gradually speeds up the switch.
Figure4b represents the same problem, but for inferring the correct context
(i.e. that an object is located at arm position 4). This has been calculated as
a time difference from an object has been touched to the point where context
4 (a context where an object is believed to appear to arm position 4) has a
higher posterior probability than context 1 (the initial context where no object
isbelievedtobeinfrontofthehumanoid).Asshowninthefigureabove,allcases
showagradualchangeinthesamemannerforbothprecisionparameters.Based
44 F. Novicky et al.
on these analyses, we selected four different cases where behaviour is distinct
from each other. This is highlighted in dashed green boxes of Fig.4, which were
thenappliedinthehumanoid.Basedonthisfinding,wealsoconcludethatthere
is a strong binding of lower sensory precision with stronger habitual behaviour,
at least in tactile detection and exploratory domain, as these two appear to
modulatethebehaviourinthesamemanner.Thisisbecausetheeffectsofthese
twoprecisiontermsprovidethesamefunctionwhenitcomestoatemporaldelay
of active sensing. Given the methodological structure of (Azarfar et al. 2019)
that compared animals with high and normal levels of serotonin, the upper-
left and bottom-right green dashed boxes can be regarded as a behaviour from
the wild-type animals, providing the baseline model. The other two boxes then
demonstrate a behaviour of agents with higher levels of serotonin.
3.2 Validation with Humanoid
We evaluated the model on the physical Nao robot. Videos of the experiments
can be found in Appendix A.3. Figure5 shows the results after running the four
experiments in the Nao robot. In these simulations, an object appeared after
the 8th time-step at arm position 4 (which can also be inferred from the plots
representing the observation and arm position). Compared to Fig.4, it seems
apparentthat thesimulated resultswith therobotics application areconsistent.
First of all, the plots of the arm position (upper-right panels) show a trend that
increasing ζ or decreasing ρ leads to a faster switch in policy from a large to
a small movement amplitude. Specifically, the switch can happen up to 8 time-
steps faster (representing one full arm swing). This can also be seen in the plots
of the policy posterior in the bottom-left panels (i.e. the value for the small
amplitude is higher than the value for the large amplitude at an earlier time-
step).Next,theplotsrepresentingthecontextposteriorshowthatwithahigher
ζ or lower ρ, the correct context can be inferred four time-steps faster (i.e. half
an arm swing).
In addition to testing whether the simulation results when varying ζ and
ρ can be validated in experiments with the Nao robot, we also conducted an
experiment to see whether behaviour is similar when the robot is touched in
differentarmpositions.Resultsbetweentouchingtherobotinarmposition3(see
Fig.6a) and in arm position 4 (see Fig.5c) under the same precision parameters
show that this is indeed the case. Namely, the switch between policies occurs
at the same time (considering it takes one time-step longer to see the change in
policyforFig.6a)andalsothecontextposteriorsfortherespectivearmposition
(i.e. ‘Touched right’ (red line) in Fig.5c and ‘Touched middle’ (yellow line) in
Fig.6a) seem to increase with a similar trend. The difference after time-step
32 is due to a missed sensory stimulation. The missed sensory stimulation also
provides an interesting case where the consequences of unreliable sensors affect
active sensing. This then leads to a longer exploration and a sudden drop in the
context posterior. This indicates a loss of confidence in the agent’s beliefs about
understanding the newly acquired structure of the environment, causing it to
explore for longer.
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 45
Lastly, we conducted a longer experiment with 80 time-steps (see Fig.6b),
where we switched from touching the robot in arm position 2 to arm position
3 after 30 time-steps (indicated by the red line). As can be seen in the plot
for the context posterior (bottom-right panel), the robot was able to correctly
infer the change in the context (i.e. the context of being touched in arm posi-
tion 2 goes down after 30 time-steps and the context of being touched in arm
position 3 goes up) and adapted its behaviour accordingly (i.e. after time-step
30, the robot switches back to large movement amplitude and after time-step
45, the robot switches to a small movement amplitude around arm position 3).
Theseresultssuggestthatthemodelcanquicklyadapttonewinformation,asa
switchinarmpositionleadstoaswitchinbehaviourandposteriorprobabilities.
Doing so, we just touched the surface of the robotics application for the neuro-
scientific research, but such extensions can inform neuroscience and psychology
researchmoreabouttheassumptionsoriginatingfromthesefields,suchasadap-
tive behavioural switching in an environment where objects are not stationary,
something that the gap-crossing paradigm does not consider.
4 Discussion
Westudiedthebehaviourofahumanoidrobotwithserotonergicdepletionusing
theactiveinferenceframework(Adamsetal.2013;Fristonetal.2017;DaCosta
et al. 2020) – where we associated serotonin with a modulation of sensory or
habitual precision.
Although this work was inspired by rodent behaviour with serotonin alter-
ation (Azarfar et al. 2019), humans also show a similar aspect of switching from
a coarse-grained action execution to a more fine-grained one – once an object
or environment is being explored. The more detailed behaviour provides more
information about the texture or shape, or even motion of the object (Ryan
et al. 2021). In our case, we focused on exploratory strategies in the tactile
domain which extends current neuroscientific and psychological research focus-
ingonexplorationmostlyinvision(NajemnikandGeisler2005,2008;Renninger
et al. 2007). We also extend this by focusing on subtle changes in neuromodula-
tion–specificallyserotonin–andshowthattofullycomprehendhowweareable
to resolve uncertainty in the world via adjusting our sensors, neuromodulatory
systems also have to be investigated.
There are, however, other computational models focusing on the function
of serotonin. Most of them are developed under the reinforcement learning
framework focusing on assertive behaviour (Daw et al. 2002; Doya 2002; Dayan
and Huys 2008; Cools et al. 2011). These models thus analyze the exploitative
behaviour,i.e.,howtobehavetocollecttheleastpunishment.Ourmodel–where
we modelled (consequences of) altered levels of serotonin via habitual and sen-
sory precision in order to bias exploratory behaviour – seems to be compatible
with previous models as well. In particular, (Dayan and Huys 2008) suggested
that modulating the reward value – in order to promote assertive behaviour
linked to serotonin (Dayan and Huys 2009) – limits the exploration of cases
46 F. Novicky et al.
Fig.5. Application of the generative model in a humanoid. This figure represents the
experimentsconductedintheNaorobotfordifferentvaluesofζ andρ,whereanobject
appears in arm position 4 after the 8th time-step. For each experiment, the top-left
panelslabeledas‘Observation’representwhetherornottherobotistouchedforevery
time-step.Here,avalueof1meansthatasensorwastriggered,whileavalueof0says
thatnotouchwassensed.Thetop-rightpanels‘ArmPosition’representthe(discrete)
position ofthehandper time-step. Therearefivehandpositionsthatcanbereached.
These graphs nicely show the switch from the large amplitude to the small one. The
bottom-left panels represent the ‘Policy Posterior’ for the large amplitude (yellow)
and small amplitude (purple). Lastly, the bottom-right panels ‘Contextual posterior’
represent the posterior probabilities for four different contexts in which the agent can
find itself. It starts with the preference over ‘Not touched’ and eventually switches
to ‘Touched right’, which is the context where a hand was touched at position 4 as
specified above. (Color figure online)
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 47
Fig.6. Additional simulations in the robot. The template of results is the same as in
Fig.5. Figure (a) represents an interesting case when an object appeared at the arm
position 3; and one stimulation at the 32nd time-step was missed, leading to more
exploration compared to Fig.5c. In addition, this led to a sudden drop in context
posterior. Figure (b) is slightly different, as there are 80 time-steps instead of 40 as in
previousexperiments.Theredlinesherespecifywhenacontextwaschanged(i.e.,when
a researcher’s hand position appeared at a different position). (Color figure online)
48 F. Novicky et al.
where the reward is expected to be lower. Hence our speculation is that the
consequence of an altered level of serotonin (especially from birth which is the
case of SERT-/- mice) can lead to changes in sensory and/or habitual precision.
Aligning exploratory and exploitative models of serotonin is thus an interesting
field for future research.
Although we linked our analysis to serotonin specifically, this simulation can
also test the tactile exploratory differences in people with Autism Spectrum
Disorder(ASD).Thisistheoreticallypossible,aspreviouslyithasbeensuggested
thatASDisassociatedwithaberrantsensoryprecision(VanBoxtelandLu2013;
Lawsonetal.2014;Palmeretal.2017).ThesetheoriesrelateASDtoanincrease
in sensory precision. In this work, as we specifically tested the sensory precision
parameter ζ, our analysis can also be used to explore ASD abnormalities in the
tactile exploratory domain. Based on our results and following the theories, we
hypothesizethatthetimeofswitchingtoadetailedexploratoryhandmovement
will happen faster in comparison to a typical group. Such associations can also
deepen the connection between serotonergic alterations in ASD (Muller et al.
2016).
Inourwork,wespecificallyfocusonhowactivesensingismodulatedviasero-
tonin which extends on previous assumptions of active sensing models (Yang et
al. 2016; Martinez-Hernandez et al. 2017; Bajcsy et al. 2018; Parr et al. 2021).
In addition to this, we specifically motivate our model via the dark-room prob-
lem(Fristonetal.2012)whichstatesthathavingnoinformation(i.e.,notsensing
any object) increases the uncertainty of the world rather than decreasing it via
holdingsomeunderstanding(orarelatedhiddenstate)thatiscertainaboutsuch
a situation. Although this approach is motivated by philosophy (Sun and Fire-
stone2020)andisthusspeculative,weneverthelessshowthatwecanuseitasa
motivation to create a model of active sensing. Thus, our modelling contributes
to the field of neurorobotics that aims to strengthen both robotics applications
and create better replicas of biological agents (Krichmar 2018; Tani and White
2022) via the application of (purposefully built) uncertain environments to trig-
ger active sensing.
Lastly,ourworkhastouchedupontheconceptofembodimentindistinctliv-
ing systems but also distinct architectures of robots (Glenberg 2010; Lux et al.
2021). We highlight the analogies of different bodies (c.f., humans and rodents)
that are exploited by agents in order to fulfil the same task, which is to collect
the most informative stimuli from the world to resolve a model’s uncertainty
of it. Surely, different bodies provide different strategies, but as we have shown
here, some strategies can be united and driven very similarly, such as exploring
an environment using whiskers or hand movement. In robotics, there are sev-
eral distinct architectures of robots to fulfil distinct tasks (Rubio et al. 2019).
Although this is outside the scope of this paper, we hope to motivate future
researchers to play with the concept of embodiment and see what strategies
are universal across several bodies, and what changes lead to different neural
encodings, for instance.
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 49
4.1 Limitation
Hereweconsiderseverallimitationsofourworkthatareworthmentioning.First,
thedifferencebetweenhandmovementandanimalwhiskingisobviouslydistinct,
and the fact that both are used for tactile exploration can be misleading from
the neuroscientific point of view, as these processes are encoded with different
importance(i.e.itislessimportanttoloseonewhiskerbutmoretragictolosea
humanarm).Forinstance,thespeedofwhiskingduringobjectexplorationisup
25Hz (Berg and Kleinfeld 2003), which is a speed that cannot be reached by a
hand. However, the model is simplified enough to justify the use of both models
for both species independently, and the link should be further tested to suggest
whetherthisgeneralizationispossible.Furthermore,whilethemodelworkswith
discrete actions—which can be action primitives—its extension to continuous
control could be interesting for robot exploration tasks. The models combining
discreteandcontinuousdomainshavebeenshownin(Parretal.2021,2022).As
afinalpracticalconsideration,weacknowledgethatthetouchsensorsontheNao
robot are not suited for object exploration, as reliable stimulation of the touch
sensor only occurred when using a researcher’s hand (see also Appendix A.2).
5 Conclusion
Wedescribedanactivesensingmodelinspiredbyserotonergicmodulationunder
the active inference framework. Particularly, we designed a generative model to
perform tactile exploration in a humanoid robot. While the presented robotic
model is still far away from human tactile exploration we suggested some pos-
sible relations. Specifically, we have shown that to resolve uncertainty in the
environment, the influence of high sensory and/or low habitual precision on the
inference process leads to a faster appearance of an active sensing behaviour.
Moreover, our findings also contribute to scrutinizing the vast functions of sero-
tonin(Bergeretal.2009)thatinourcaseareassociatedwiththeaforementioned
parameters.Next,wehighlightthatitmightbeacomplextasktodissociatethe
effect of habitual behaviour with imprecise sensory estimation at least in active
sensing. Whether this is a universal criterion of behaviour and thus extends
to other behavioural processes such as social cognition (Lockwood and Klein-
Flu¨gge 2021) or reward learning (Lindstro¨m et al. 2021), and whether these are
regulated via serotonin in the same manner, should be further tested.
Acknowledgement. FNwassupportedbytheEUH2020MSCAITNproject‘Sero-
tonin and Beyond’ (N 953327). We thank Tansu Celikel and Thomas Parr for their
helpful discussions.
50 F. Novicky et al.
A Appendix
A.1 Python Scripts
Thescriptsthatweusedinordertosimulatetheexperimentandruntheexper-
iment in the Nao robot can be found on the following GitHub page: https://
github.com/SimonJanssen1/Serotonin-based-active-sensing.git
In order to generate the heatmaps in Sect.3.1, we used a Jupyter Notebooks
file in which we iterated through different combinations of ζ and ρ parameters,
whilesimulatingatouchinarmposition4.Wealsousedthescriptsasexplained
in Sect.2.6 (see also Fig.7 for a visual description of the software architecture)
in order to conduct the experiment with the Nao robot. Next, we simulated
the script communicating with the Nao robot to test whether the architecture
is working correctly. In this script, the general architecture is the same with
an acting and sensing thread and some shared variables. However, instead of
communicating with the robot to sense the environment and execute actions,
the script simulates these behaviours. For simulating touch, we defined three
options: 1) simulating touch at specific time-steps, which could be indicated by
means of a list, 2) simulating touch in a specific arm position, or 3) simulating
touch randomly, where a probability of touch could be specified.
A.2 Experiment with Different Sensory Stimulation
In addition to the experiments with the Nao robot presented in Sect.3.2, we
conducted another experiment where we touched the robot in arm position 4
with a metal object instead of using a researcher’s hand. Because the robot has
capacitivesensorsonthebackoftherighthand,itshouldstillbeabletosensea
touchwhenusingametalobject.However,Fig.8showsthatthisisnotthecase.
Namely, the robot only registers a touch four times, whereas we expected it to
register a touch every time the arm was at position 4. These results thus show
that the back touch sensor on the hand of the Nao robot was not very sensitive
to touch with materials other than a hand.
A.3 Experiment Videos
During the experiments, we also recorded the humanoid’s behaviour. These
results can be found under the following link: https://drive.google.com/drive/
folders/1QFmy1nHtQlmWxmKPZa-kbgj84FBJ9Q6n?usp=sharing.
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 51
Fig.7.ThesoftwarearchitectureoftheNaorobottoconducttheexperiment.Thescript
that interacts with the robot consists of two different threads that are responsible for
actingandsensing,respectively.Theactingthreadreadsanobservationfromtheshared
variablestoringthetouchvalue,whichitsendstothepythonmodel.Thepythonmodel
subsequentlycomputesthenextactionfortherobot,giventheobservation,andsends
thisactionbacktotheactingthread,whichusesittomovetothenextstate.Whenin
the new state, the robot moves its arm down and up again, during which the sensing
threadisalsoactiveandrecordswhetherornotthetouchsensoroftherobotistouched.
Iftherobot’ssensoristouched,thesensingthreadwillmakesuretoupdatetheshared
variable storing the touch value accordingly, such that the acting thread can send the
observation to the python model in the next time step.
52 F. Novicky et al.
Fig.8.Stimulating the Nao’s sensors using a metal object.Thesearetheplotsforthe
experiment conducted in the Nao robot with ζ =0.5 and ρ=0.5, where the robot is
touchedwithametal objectinarmposition 4.Fortheexperiment, theplotsshowfor
everytime-stepwhetherornottherobotistouched(topleft),whichpositionthehand
is in (top right), which policy is preferred (bottom left), and what context the robot
believes it is in (bottom right). As can be seen in the observation plot, touching the
robot is often not registered and results in unreliable behaviour.
References
Adams, R.A., Shipp, S., Friston, K.J.: Predictions not commands: active inference in
the motor system. Brain Struct. Funct. 218, 611–643 (2013)
Azarfar,A., Zhang, Y., Alishbayli, A., Schubert,D., Homberg, J.R., Celikel, T.: Sero-
tonergic development of active sensing. BioRxiv, 762534 (2019)
Bajcsy, R., Aloimonos, Y., Tsotsos, J.K.: Revisiting active perception. Auton. Robot.
42, 177–196 (2018)
Baltieri,M.,Buckley,C.L.:Thedarkroomprobleminpredictiveprocessingandactive
inference, a legacy of cognitivism? In: Artificial Life Conference Proceedings, pp.
40–47 (2019)
Bang, D., et al.: Sub-second dopamine and serotonin signaling in human striatum
during perceptual decision-making. Neuron 108(5), 999–1010 (2020)
Berg,R.W.,Kleinfeld,D.:Rhythmicwhiskingbyrat:retractionaswellasprotraction
of the vibrissae is under active muscular control. J. Neurophysiol. 89(1), 104–117
(2003)
Berger, M., Gray, J.A., Roth, B.L.: The expanded biology of serotonin. Annu. Rev.
Med. 60, 355–366 (2009)
Blei, D.M., Kucukelbir, A., McAuliffe, J.D.: Variational inference: a review for statis-
ticians. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 112(518), 859–877 (2017)
Cools,R.,Nakamura,K.,Daw,N.D.:Serotoninanddopamine:unifyingaffective,acti-
vational, and decision functions. Neuropsychopharmacology 36(1), 98–113 (2011)
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 53
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., Friston, K.: Active inference
on discrete state-spaces: a synthesis. J. Math. Psychol. 99, 102447 (2020)
Daw, N.D., Kakade, S., Dayan, P.: Opponent interactions between serotonin and
dopamine. Neural Netw. 15(4–6), 603–616 (2002)
Dayan,P.,Huys,Q.J.:Serotonininaffectivecontrol.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.32,95–126
(2009)
Dayan, P., Huys, Q.J.M.: Serotonin, inhibition, and negative mood. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 4(2), e4 (2008)
Doya, K.: Metalearning and neuromodulation. Neural Netw. 15(4–6), 495–506 (2002)
Friston, K.: The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
11(2), 127–138 (2010)
Friston,K.,FitzGerald,T.,Rigoli,F.,Schwartenbeck,P.,Pezzulo,G.:Activeinference:
a process theory. Neural Comput. 29(1), 1–49 (2017)
Friston, K., Thornton, C., Clark, A.: Free-energy minimization and the dark-room
problem. Front. Psychol. 130 (2012)
Friston,K.J.,Parr,T.,deVries,B.:Thegraphicalbrain:beliefpropagationandactive
inference. Netw. Neurosci. 1(4), 381–414 (2017)
Glenberg,A.M.:Embodimentasaunifyingperspectiveforpsychology.WileyInterdisc.
Rev.: Cogn. Sci. 1(4), 586–596 (2010)
Heins, C., et al.: pymdp: a python library for active inference in discrete state spaces.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03904 (2022)
Homberg,J.R.,Schubert,D.,Asan,E.,Aron,E.N.:Sensoryprocessingsensitivityand
serotoningenevariance:insightsintomechanismsshapingenvironmentalsensitivity.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 71, 472–483 (2016)
Kaboli, M., Feng, D., Yao, K., Lanillos, P., Cheng, G.: A tactile-based framework
for active object learning and discrimination using multimodal robotic skin. IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett. 2(4), 2143–2150 (2017)
Kaplan, R., Friston, K.J.: Planning and navigation as active inference. Biol. Cybern.
112(4), 323–343 (2018)
Krichmar,J.L.:Neurorobotics-athrivingcommunityandapromisingpathwaytoward
intelligent cognitive robots. Front. Neurorobot. 12, 42 (2018)
Lanillos, P., et al.: Active inference in robotics and artificial agents: survey and chal-
lenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01871 (2021)
Lawson,R.P.,Rees,G.,Friston,K.J.:Anaberrantprecisionaccountofautism.Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 8, 302 (2014)
Lindstr¨om,B.,Bellander,M.,Schultner,D.T.,Chang,A.,Tobler,P.N.,Amodio,D.M.:
A computational reward learning account of social media engagement. Nat. Com-
mun. 12(1), 1311 (2021)
Lockwood,P.L.,Klein-Flu¨gge,M.C.:Computationalmodellingofsocialcognitionand
behaviour—areinforcementlearningprimer.Soc.Cogn.Affect.Neurosci.16(8),761–
771 (2021)
Lux, V., Non, A.L., Pexman, P.M., Stadler, W., Weber, L.A., Kru¨ger, M.: A develop-
mental framework for embodiment research: the next step toward integrating con-
cepts and methods. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 15, 672740 (2021)
Martinez-Hernandez,U.,Dodd,T.J.,Evans,M.H.,Prescott,T.J.,Lepora,N.F.:Active
sensorimotor control for tactile exploration. Robot. Auton. Syst. 87, 15–27 (2017)
Meera, A.A., Novicky, F., Parr, T., Friston, K., Lanillos, P., Sajid, N.: Reclaim-
ing saliency: rhythmic precision-modulated action and perception. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.12652 (2022)
Miller, K.J., Shenhav, A., Ludvig, E.A.: Habits without values. Psychol. Rev. 126(2),
292 (2019)
54 F. Novicky et al.
Muller,C.L.,Anacker,A.M.,Veenstra-VanderWeele,J.:Theserotoninsysteminautism
spectrum disorder: from biomarker to animal models. Neuroscience 321, 24–41
(2016)
Najemnik,J.,Geisler,W.S.:Optimaleyemovementstrategiesinvisualsearch.Nature
434(7031), 387–391 (2005)
Najemnik,J.,Geisler,W.S.:Eyemovementstatisticsinhumansareconsistentwithan
optimal search strategy. J. Vis. 8(3), 4 (2008)
Naothehumanoidandprogrammablerobot|aldebaran(n.d.).https://www.aldebaran.
com/en/nao
Oliver,G.,Lanillos,P.,Cheng,G.:Anempiricalstudyofactiveinferenceonahumanoid
robot. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 14(2), 462–471 (2021)
Palmer,C.J.,Lawson,R.P.,Hohwy,J.:Bayesianapproachestoautism:towardsvolatil-
ity, action, and behavior. Psychol. Bull. 143(5), 521 (2017)
Parr,T.,Friston,K.J.:Uncertainty,epistemicsandactiveinference.J.R.Soc.Interface
14(136), 20170376 (2017)
Parr,T.,Limanowski,J.,Rawji,V.,Friston,K.:Thecomputationalneurologyofmove-
ment under active inference. Brain 144(6), 1799–1818 (2021)
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., Friston, K.J.: Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in
Mind, Brain, and Behavior. MIT Press, Cambridge (2022)
Parr, T., Sajid, N., Da Costa, L., Mirza, M.B., Friston, K.J.: Generative models for
active vision. Front. Neurorobot. 15, 651432 (2021)
Rasouli,A.,Lanillos,P.,Cheng,G.,Tsotsos,J.K.:Attention-basedactivevisualsearch
for mobile robots. Auton. Robot. 44(2), 131–146 (2020)
Renninger, L.W., Verghese, P., Coughlan, J.: Where to look next? Eye movements
reduce local uncertainty. J. Vis. 7(3), 6 (2007)
Rubio, F., Valero, F., Llopis-Albert, C.: A review of mobile robots: concepts, meth-
ods, theoretical framework, and applications. Int. J. Adv. Rob. Syst. 16(2),
1729881419839596 (2019)
Ryan,C.P.,Bettelani,G.C.,Ciotti,S.,Parise,C.,Moscatelli,A.,Bianchi,M.:Theinter-
action between motion and texture in the sense of touch. J. Neurophysiol. 126(4),
1375–1390 (2021)
Sun, Z., Firestone, C.: The dark room problem. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24(5), 346–348
(2020)
Tani, J., White, J.: Cognitive neurorobotics and self in the shared world, a focused
review of ongoing research. Adapt. Behav. 30(1), 81–100 (2022)
VanBoxtel,J.J.,Lu,H.:APredictiveCodingPerspectiveonAutismSpectrumDisor-
ders, vol. 4. Frontiers Media SA (2013)
Voigts, J., Sakmann, B., Celikel, T.: Unsupervised whisker tracking in unrestrained
behaving animals. J. Neurophysiol. 100(1), 504–515 (2008)
Yang,S.C.-H.,Wolpert,D.M.,Lengyel,M.:Theoreticalperspectivesonactivesensing.
Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 11, 100–108 (2016)
Robotic Active Tactile Sensing Inspired by Serotonergic Modulation 55
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.