MORTAL COMPUTATION: A FOUNDATION FOR
BIOMIMETIC INTELLIGENCE
Alexander Ororbia Karl Friston
Rochester Institute of Technology VERSES AI Research Lab
Rochester, NY 14623 Los Angeles, CA 90016, USA
ago@cs.rit.edu karl.friston@verses.ai
ABSTRACT
This review motivates and synthesizes research efforts in neuroscience-inspired artificial
intelligence and biomimetic computing in terms of mortal computation. Specifically, we
characterize the notion of mortality by recasting ideas in biophysics, cybernetics, and cognitive
science in terms of a theoretical foundation for sentient behavior. We frame the mortal
computation thesis through the Markov blanket formalism and the circular causality entailed by
inference, learning, and selection. The ensuing framework — underwritten by the free energy
principle — could prove useful for guiding the construction of unconventional connectionist
computational systems, neuromorphic intelligence, and chimeric agents, including sentient
organoids, which stand to revolutionize the long-term future of embodied, enactive artificial
intelligence and cognition research.
Keywords Mortal computation · Biomimetic intelligence · Free energy · Homeorhesis
1 Introduction
Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.
-Søren Kierkegaard [195]
A key aspect of biomimetics is that of biomimicry or, rather, emulating natural or biological systems, when crafting
mathematical, computational processes or technological artifacts. This is done generally with the aim of solving a
complex problem, potentially facilitating bionics — and the engineering of a nature-oriented system — for real-
world applications. It follows that biomimetic and bionic intelligence research seeks to construct the cognitive
functionality and processes that underwrite intelligence by imitating or emulating natural minds and brains, the
products of countless centuries of evolution.
Life itself serves as an unceasingly fecund source of inspiration, capturing the attention of countless theoreticians
and engineers; ranging from biology to physics — to philosophy to computer science. Living systems, from single-
cell microorganisms to complex creatures such as plants and animals, offer a remarkable example of how
homeorhesis (and related notions of allostasis and autopoiesis) — the self-regulating processes employed by
biological systems to assemble and maintain themselves [71, 72, 53] — can support the emergence of adaptive and
complex behavior. From the computational point-of-view, homeorhesis shapes and directs the ‘calculations’
conducted by the organism as it interacts with its environment; specifically, its ability to infer, learn, and evolve.
From the standpoint of cybernetics, emulating the computational properties of living systems goes far back, notably
within the framework of self-reproducing cellular automata [345, 148, 335, 359].
Our central argument is that if the aim is to craft mechanistic, computational systems capable of the vast array of
animal or human-like behaviors, the thrust of machine intelligence will need to change over the coming decades,
similar in spirit to the call for a shift from symbolic to non-symbolic processing [107, 106, 26], which motivated
classical connectionism and statistical learning. Machine intelligence research may need to focus on the processes
that realize its nonlinear self-organization and efficient adaptation; such a move is towards the development of
survival-oriented processing that embodies computational notions of life/mortality, a sort of naturalistic machine
intelligence. Specifically, we argue that a crucial pathway — on the way to artificial general intelligence (AGI) – lies
Preprint
in mortal computing, a framework that we seek to develop in this article, hoping to engage researchers pursuing
the sciences of the artificial [311].
At this point, one might ask: what is mortal computation? ‘Mortal computation’, originating in [170] and further
developed and advocated for in [262, 254], asserts that the mathematical calculations/processes that underlie
information processing in a biological or artificial system are inseparable from the physical substrate that
implements and executes them, i.e., the ‘software’ cannot be divorced from the ‘hardware’. This stands in strong
contrast with the notion of computation in Computer Science: here, software is decoupled from hardware and
software is ‘immortal’, which means that it can be copied to different hardware and still be executable. Any machine
learning algorithm, which can be viewed as program that adjusts itself in accordance with data, also relies upon
this separation (and is designed with this in mind). Furthermore, immortal computation means that a program,
even an adaptive one, e.g., an ‘intelligent system’, develops characteristics and acquires knowledge irrespective of
the medium upon which it is instantiated. In contrast, mortal computation means that once the hardware medium
upon which a program is implemented within fails, or ‘dies’, the knowledge, behavior, and specific functionality,
including its ‘quirks’, will also cease to exist. This is much akin to what would happen to the knowledge/behavior
acquired/developed by a biological organism once it is no longer able to maintain itself.
We argue that, at least for AGI, it may be necessary to consider mortal computation, if not entirely abandoning
immortal computation. Transitioning to a kind of computation that is tightly bound to its substrate’s fate might at
first appear unnecessary or even foolhardy; given that that such programs could be brittle and lack the universality
often sought in intelligent systems research. However, particularly when considering some of the pressing global
challenges we face today, e.g., climate change, we will foreground the advantages that attend mortal computation
— advantages which are difficult to realize in the context of immortal computation. Furthermore, efforts that
embrace such a transition may find useful developments surprisingly easy. In general, the phrase mortal
computation affords many perspectives on one central truth – intelligent behavior, whether manifest in biological
or artificial form, is inextricably intertwined with persistence in the face of an environment that could bring about
its end. This important notion unifies many ideas that have been articulated over the decades, across different
disciplines, including philosophy, cybernetics, biophysics, computer science, cognitive science, and physiology, and
has implications for a large swath of application domains in computational neuroscience, neuromorphic computing,
and neurorobotics [79].
Structure of the paper. In this work, we describe a formal framework for mortal computation that may serve as a
guide for addressing biomimetic systems, models for neural information processing, and AGI. First, in Section 2, we
motivate the mortal computation thesis as necessary for biomimetics, drawing from thermodynamics, the notion
of embodiment and enactivism, and the philosophy of life and death. Next, in Section 3, we will review historical
concepts to characterize mortal computation in terms of biophysics, cybernetics, cognitive science and naturalist
philosophy. In Section 4, we frame mortal computation from the perspective of mortal inference, learning, and
selection based on the free energy principle, the Markov blanket formalism, and foundations of morphology.
Section 5 offers a definition of mortal computation, elucidating several of its tenets that could feature in future
developments in biomimetic and bionic intelligence. Finally, we will consider longer-term implications of the
ensuing framework for scientific research in this direction.
2 Why Mortal Computation?
At first glance, there might appear to be a disadvantage in conflating some software’s fate with that of the hardware
that implements it: we are precluding the ability to duplicate/transfer our computer programs across platforms and
the ability to design them with little worry as to how they will be executed. However, abandoning the immortal
nature of computation brings with it something invaluable; namely, a substantial saving in energy usage and a
reduction in the cost of creating the hardware needed to execute the requisite calculations. Furthermore, this shift
sets the stage for a key way of thinking about artificial minds: intelligence and adaptive behavior are driven by an
impetus to continue to persist in the face of an evolving environment or ecological niche (econiche). Notably, this
framing of artificial intelligence (AI) reflects conceptual shifts seen over past decades in cognitive science and
naturalist philosophy of mind.
Thermodynamic Motivations. To understand why energy savings comes naturally with a mortal form of computing,
it is important to consider the thermodynamics of contemporary computing. In the context of open systems, there
is an intimate relationship between information processing and thermodynamic efficiency as governed by
Landauer’s principle [208, 45] and the Jarzynski equality [186, 114, 14]. Specifically, Landauer’s principle states that
the minimum amount of energy E required to erase a bit of information is proportional to the operating
2
Preprint
Figure 1: One of the key differences between immortal computation (Left), implementing a model such as the modern-day
deep neural network (DNN), and mortal computation (Right), implementing a biophysical morphological model such as a
spiking neural network, will be their thermodynamic costs. In a typical Von Neumann architecture that runs an immortal
program, energy walls exist between different types of memory in the computer architecture, requiring an expenditure of
energy to transfer information, e.g., synaptic weight values or intermediate layer activities, from non-volatile memory
(NAND flash) to volatile memory of varying types (DRAM, SRAM) finally to the CPU housing a DNN. In a neuromorphic chip,
such as one implemented as a memristor crossbar (Right), that would manifest a mortal program, processing happens
directly on top of/within memory, circumventing the thermodynamic work required in a Von Neumann setup.
temperature T of the (computing) system: −𝐸 >𝑘 𝐵 𝑇ln(2) where k B is Boltzmann’s constant. Thus, an irreversible
change in a computer’s stored information requires the dissipation of a minimum level of heat to its surrounding
environment. The Jarzynski equality, in effect, states that the difference of the free energies of states X and Y is
constrained to be equal to the average over all the fluctuations in work done on all paths in taking that system
from (equilibrium) state X to (typically non-equilibrium) state Y, i.e.,
𝐹 −𝐹 −𝑊
exp( 𝑋 𝑌 )=〈exp( 𝑋𝑌 )〉
𝑘 𝑇 𝑘 𝑇
𝐵 𝐵
where F X is the free energy of state X, and 𝑊 𝑋𝑌 is the irreversible (stochastic) work done on the path taken from
X to Y, and 〈∘〉 denotes averaging. Notably, the Jarzynski equality can be used to compute the Landauer limit
independently of the speed of the irreversible logical procedure (e.g., bit erasure) under consideration [20]. Put
simply, when Landauer’s principle and the Jarzynski equality are taken together, there is a lower bound on the
amount of thermodynamic work needed to change the information content of a computing system.
When viewed through the lens of the free energy principle [134], changing a computing system’s information
content can be read as inference (or belief-updating) in response to the external perturbations that a (e.g.,
neuronal) system is open to [137]. Furthermore, it can be shown that inference — cast as a variational free energy
minimizing process — shares the same minima with thermodynamic free energy [305]. It then follows that the
statistical and thermodynamic efficiency of any system — to which the free energy principle applies — are two
sides of the same coin. This relationship, however, depends upon a description of systemic dynamics in terms of
inference. In other words, the dynamics are interpreted as a gradient flow on variational free energy or,
equivalently, (the logarithm of) Bayesian model evidence. This stands in contrast with the simulation of inference
in modern-day computers, e.g., von Neumann architectures. In this simulation setting, there are additional
thermodynamic costs that are induced by reading and writing to computer memory, i.e., the power consumption
of moving data between off-chip memory units and a computing processor is nearly 100 times greater than the
floating-point operations on those data. These costs are sometimes associated with the ‘von Neumann bottleneck’
or the ‘memory wall’ [368]. This means that, in order to realize the potential thermodynamic efficiency of Bayesian
computations, it is necessary to implement belief updating in memory, also known as in-memory processing or
processing-in-memory [154, 368].
From the perspective of machine intelligence (see Figure 1), these considerations license an important move to
biomimetic computing based upon local [free] energy functionals and grounded in implicit in-memory
computation, where memories correspond to the (c.f., synaptic) connection weights and the parameters of implicit
generative models. From the perspective of mortal computation, these considerations speak to the importance of
instantiating all aspects of computation in the substrate that will perform those computations. Broadly speaking,
the calculations that characterize modern-day AI systems will, in effect, need to be brought as close as possible to
3
Preprint
the hardware that supports them; much as is the case in biological systems. Immortal computation, in contrast, will
inherently require work to transfer the values of, for example, weight tensors to and from memory. It will further
have to deal with random access memory, as the price paid will always relate to the read/write cost. The underlying
physics of information necessarily dissolves any hard line between thermodynamic and statistical efficiency. In
other words, to be Bayes optimal is to be thermodynamically efficient and vice versa [305, 306]. One can leverage
this fact to furnish complementary perspectives on many aspects of neuronal architecture and physiology.
A general move to the thermodynamically efficient computing described above addresses concerns that have
emerged in AI research [17, 62, 322, 303, 272]: how may we design systems that do not escalate computational and
carbon costs? In essence, there is a need to move away from Red AI, which is dominated by immortal computation,
towards Green AI [303], which mortal computation would naturally facilitate, speaking to global sustainable
development goals [214, 240]. Neural transformers, which power modern of “generative AI”, emit approximately
4.96 times the lifetime emissions of the average car [322]1, and, based on the number of graphics processing units
(GPUs) shipped in 2022, it was estimated that the chat generative pre-trained transformer [286] (ChatGPT)
produces 502 metric tons of carbon during its training (GPT-3 required 1287 megawatt hours) [232].
Embodiment and Enactivism. From the field of cognitive science, a core duality has emerged over the decades that
echoes the divide between immortal and mortal computation. Specifically, it is between isolated versus situated or
embodied cognition [128]. Isolated cognition takes the position that an entity without a ‘body’ could exhibit
cognitive skills. It is possible to have a “brain in a vat” [284], i.e., a mind and its cognitive functionality is
independent of its particular physical embedding or substrate; reminiscent of Descartes’ mind-body dualism [29].
The theory of embodied cognition [355], in contrast, posits that the mind is grounded in the details of sensorimotor
coupling: an organism’s body intrinsically constrains and shapes the nature of its mental activity. This contrast
between isolated and embodied cognition can be likened to arguing whether the software that underpins
intelligence can exist without the hardware structure that manifests an agent in the physical world.
There is a great deal of evidence in support of embodiment, starting from the observation that humans reenact
experiences based on the brain’s modality-specific systems for perception and action. Representations of
knowledge are influenced by previous interactions with the world and entail reactivation of sensorimotor functions
in the absence of direct engagement with sensory input [9, 110, 5, 128]. Stronger variants of embodiment posit
that the body serves a feedback-driven role in mental functioning: a situated agent can sense the world as well as
be directly influenced by it, thus its behaviors do not require any representations or computational reference [37,
238, 353, 355]. The notion of mortal computation embraces the framing of embodiment, i.e., it views the physical
morphology as integral to the nature of its computational processing. The central functions inherent to a mortal
computer are hardware or ‘body’-based and not sharply distinct from low-level sensorimotor functions. This
arguably means that a model of mortal computing can be described as a particular instance of ‘embodied
intelligence’ (or embodied AI [108]). However, as we will see in our treatment of mortal computation, such a system
is more than embodied processing; it is also an incarnation of enactive functionality. In complement to
embodiment, enactive cognition emphasizes the dynamic relationship between a living entity’s environment and
the entity itself [331]; an entity’s cognition is the result of exercising its sensorimotor systems to exchange with its
world. This means that a mortal computer is an active participant in the generation of the information that it
processes and thus will be shaped by the consequences of how it acts and has acted [104, 342].
The Philosophy of How Death Shapes Life. Philosophically, the “finitude” of life can be viewed as one of the factors
that endows life with purpose, creating the ‘impetus’ (e.g., selective pressure) for niche construction. This impetus
drives us humans to communicate (e.g., teach) to pass on wisdom and heuristics from generation to generation;
i.e., cultural niche construction, as seen through the lens of evolutionary psychology. This allows us to create works
of art to express an inner message or embodied experience. Furthermore, life’s finiteness entails reproduction,
where genetic predispositions are passed on that ensure the survival of the species. This perspective motivates the
self-replicating biophysical and cybernetical aspects of a mortal computer considered in Section 3. From the
perspectives of philosophy of life/death [125] and existentialism [126], death — or the termination of an entity’s
existence — is a horizon that implicitly shapes behavior and consciousness. In other words, death is what allows
future events to exert an implicit/explicit pressure on present activity [195]. An entity’s existence and “being” can
be considered to be over time and time is finite: ultimately ending with our death [166]. As a result, for both
biological and artificial mortal artefacts, understanding what an authentic life is means coming to terms with one’s
finitude. This notion of death — and its effect on an entity’s life — helps to philosophically frame mortal
1 Transformers, at the time of the writing of this article, have become far larger than those studied in [322], resulting in far
larger carbon footprints. However, even then, training a BERT-style transformer [102] had the carbon footprint of a round-
trip flight between New York and San Francisco, for a single passenger.
4
Preprint
computation. Although philosophical treatments of existentialism and life/death [126, 166, 125] have focused on
human beings and spoke to broad notions, we can adapt a small part of it for our purposes: extracting meaning
out of — and making sense of — death shapes an entity’s life. This allows one to understand that animals, including
humans, with the knowledge, whether implicit or explicit, that their existence is finite, are motivated to replicate
and take actions in the service of enduring persistence.
To extend the above line of thought, naturalist philosophy of mind [180, 181, 331, 342] characterizes a living entity’s
continual foraging of information as self-evidencing, i.e., optimizing evidence for its own existence [177], through
what is known as autopoietic enactivism [97]. Underlying this enactivism are two notions: operational closure and
sense making. Operational closure means that a system must undergo autopoietic self-assembly and self-
maintenance to keep separate its internal states from the external states of its niche. This creates the boundary
between what the system is from what it is not. Crucially, the system’s (e.g., metabolic) processes determine the
nature of this boundary, allowing a cell, for instance, to emerge from primordial, molecular-chemical soup [339,
341]. As a direct consequence, a system’s existence can be viewed as a process of boundary conservation; this
motivates our Markov blanket formalization of mortal computing in Section 4. Living entities exist by individuating
themselves from everything else [331]; the processes that do this are inherently those of identity constitution,
yielding a single, functionally coherent unit [341] or self-evidencing whole [103]. In complement to operational
closure is sense making; namely, the acknowledgement that there is a mutual dependence between external
processes and the entity’s internal processes, i.e., a biological system must distinguish itself from its niche yet still
be coupled to it in order to persist in that niche [341]. Sense making refers to the system’s possession of
operationally closed mechanisms that help infer the consequences of its sensorimotor actions and distinguish
different probabilistic implications of otherwise equally viable paths through a niche [103]. This autopoietic,
enactive framing of living systems will serve the biophysical, cybernetical, and cognitive framings of mortal
computing in the following section.
3 The Biophysical, Cybernetical, and Cognitive Framings of Mortal Computation
To build a foundation for mortal computation — that resonates with a more biomimetic form of machine
intelligence — this section synthesizes core concepts from physiology, biophysics, cybernetics, cognitive science,
and naturalist philosophy of mind. Woven together, these ideas form the fabric for a theoretical construct of mortal
computation, motivating its definition in Section 5.
3.1 The Biophysics of a Mortal Computer
Made possible through the flow of matter and energy – and built on autocatalytic closure [193, 145, 179] — a living
system can self-organize and grow, maintaining and repairing itself as it is subjected to environmental perturbations.
This is fueled by an organism’s metabolism; its set of life-sustaining chemical reactions that use energy to transform
materials into structures that themselves harness further energy to transform/transport material as well as
eliminate/excrete surplus material and toxins [249, 266, 292, 241]. Powered by enzyme catalysts, through the
metabolic pathways [212] inherent to catabolism — which destroys material to release energy — and inherent to
anabolism — which synthesizes material by consuming energy — an organism is able to determine which material
is toxic or worthy of consumption, reacting to changes in its environment and the behavior of other entities.
Crucially, any organism’s persistence depends on the careful regulation of the above metabolic processes [350, 297,
61, 316], such that the values of key metabolic variables, such as temperature, pH, bodily fluid balance, are kept
relatively constant, i.e., within certain boundaries and near a target value called a set point. This is the purpose of
homeostasis [50] – to ensure that the system’s essential variables are stable as it adjusts to an evolving, adversarial
environment [71, 72, 50, 53].2 Although the feedback-based error correction ability of homeostasis goes far to
provide a biological system with internal stability, it is higher-order regulation and error prevention afforded by
allostasis [320], that allows it to act in pre-emptive, non-reactive ways to ensure that homeostatic regulation is
sufficient. Acting as a sort of “predictive homeostasis”, allostasis provides anticipatory measures that are triggered
by indirect cues beyond the reach of homeostatic control, such as stressors and surprising environmental conditions
[235, 65]. Ultimately, the purpose of allostatic control is to preclude future deviations in essential variables from
happening in the first place. In a mortal computer, this means that allostatic processes finesse homeostasis (or
2 In an entity as simple as a cell, homeostatic regulation is responsible for keeping a wide range of biophysical quantities
including extracellular fluid, temperature, acidity/basicity (pH), concentration of dissolved particles (osmolality) such as
sodium, potassium, glucose, carbon dioxide, and oxygen, relatively constant and near a desired value.
5
Preprint
more generally homeorhesis), working to satisfy constraints before the need arises; this allows the mortal computer
to budget resources, as living systems do [319, 320]. Taken together, in both living entities and mortal computers,
reactive homeorhetic maintenance and proactive allostatic control work jointly to ensure that life-critical variables
remain within viable ranges.
As a consequence of the biophysical formulation above, a mortal computer’s self-organization (of its
primitives/internal states related to its hardware) constitutes its thermodynamic and metabolic efficiency,
grounding its agency and ability to adapt. Importantly, its metabolic organization stands far from thermodynamic
equilibrium given that energy and matter would be lost as heat and waste and it thus must forage, much as in living
systems as they continually acquire new resources. It is this relationship between an open system and its
environment that underwrites the system’s design; so as to ensure its thermodynamic costs are reduced to those
of living systems. Given that the second law of thermodynamics dictates that within any closed system the amount
of entropy cannot decrease, it follows that a ‘living’ (i.e., open) mortal computer is not in thermodynamic
equilibrium and thus operates as a dissipative system. This means that it must increase the thermodynamic entropy
of its environment [344, 346]). Therefore, the mortal computer’s persistence depends on its ability to remain far
from thermodynamic equilibrium (i.e., death) through its low-level processing (i.e., the acts taken to minimize its
free energy; see Section 4) so as to establish order through generating disorder [99].3
The final feature — needed to fully characterize a mortal computer is that of autopoiesis — is its ability to make
itself from within. For any entity to be considered autopoietic, it must continuously (re)produce, organize, and
maintain itself, including its constituent parts/processes and the pattern of relationships between them, without
external intervention [339, 234, 340, 60]. This means that a mortal computer must maintain its form, integrity, and
function, emphasizing a morphic treatment of intelligent, adaptive behavior. Furthermore, autopoiesis, in the sense
used here, encompasses homeostatic and allostatic control, given that an autopoietic system can leverage these
regulatory mechanisms to maintain its internal milieu. Autopoiesis grounds a system, including its production
network of processes/elements that transform/destroy, in physical space, which means that an autopoietic entity
is specified and shaped by its topological domain.
Framing a mortal computer as autopoietic firmly grounds it in its physical medium and dynamic properties. This
means that it must be able to persist longer than its components, in virtue of its regeneration/replication abilities.
For this to be possible, certain aspects of embedding space [339] must be in place [120, 117]: 1) base-level materials
such as the concentration of substrates, 2) an organization which embodies/encodes information, and 3) processes
or dynamics of continual revival and internal generation. These criteria have several implications for structural and
behavioral details of mortal computing systems. First, such systems must be able to select correct materials, e.g.,
molecules, from an environment as well as contain them in the right internal concentration/balance, using
homeostatic/allostatic regulation. As a result, any such system must possess a boundary: for instance, as in a cell,
a permeable membrane equipped with material filtering sub-systems embedded within. Due to the dissipation
induced by fluctuation-dissipation theorems, the protective body of a mortal system will itself break down as it is
buffeted by environmental perturbations [354] and will thus require ongoing repair. This repair can be effected by
replacing damaged/decayed components, e.g., molecular structures, and such components can be produced using
raw material(s) taken from the environment through a synthesis process, which itself may break down/decay.4
Biophysical Framing. The physiological considerations above imply that life has a metabolic aspect [59] and thus
the construction of a mortal computing system (Figure 2) should start from base-level functions or variables that
constitute its internal states, i.e., essential variables or ‘primitives’.5 Since the mortal computer is autopoietic, these
primitives and their physical structures, which are modulated and coordinated by many levels of regulation, should
evince continual self-repair. In essence, the design of a complete mortal computing entity should, at minimum,
consist of: 1) a boundary around the system’s internal states (the Markov blanket; see Section 4), 2) a synthesis
engine for producing the system from within, and 3) one or more transducer-actuator subsystems6 that enable
controlled interactions with an environment, e.g., trans-boundary pumps and filters.
3 In essence, this is an application of the first law of biological thermodynamics [36].
4 Recursively, this means that synthesis processes themselves must manufacture and remake their own components as
they operate, in the correct arrangement, in order to form/maintain their own structure.
5 The exact specification of the essential variables/primitives would, in principle, depend on the exact in silico instantiation
of a mortal computer system. In designing biomimetic entities, it might prove useful to relate or liken many biophysical
variables in terms of their analogues on target hardware platforms.
6 Transducers convert energy from one form to another, e.g., converting mechanical energy into electrical signals.
6
Preprint
Figure 2: Mortal computing, the underpinnings of biological (organoid) and artificial systems (neurorobot), viewed through
biophysical and cybernetic lens. A green dashed text box indicates a cybernetical principle.
7
Preprint
A basic mortal computing unit includes a physical boundary composed of embedded transducers and actuators,
allowing it to interact with its niche as an open system where material/energy pass into and from the unit across
this boundary. This transduced flow is subject to the internal control imposed by homeostatic set-points: requiring
simple mechanisms that compare sensed values produced by the transducers with stored, internally established
set points. This production-reaction specification gives the system personal cause for its actions. Any comparator,
in reaction to transduced signals, emits control signals to drive actuators, such as a secretion mechanism for
removing waste. These transducer-comparator-actuator subsystems facilitate a mortal computer’s selective
interaction with its environment; variation is information, while the effect of the system is physical force
In Figure 2 (Top), we frame mortal computation in terms of conceptual levels that depict the operational nature of
the requisite processes. The essential variables/states sit at the mortal computer’s base functional level and relate
to properties inherent to the hardware’s morphology (power level/store, temperature/heat level). Above this are
processes that mediate homeostatic control, i.e., the reactive regulation level, providing the measures needed to
counter deviations in certain system primitives to ensure that those variables remain near characteristic values.7
For example, a homeostatic function would trigger an internal action to route power from energy reserves to the
system’s primary battery, if it is below a certain level. In neuromorphic constructs of spiking neurons, one concrete
homeostatic variable is the firing rate of cells, which affects system efficiency as sparse activities promote reduced
global calculation and hardware resource use. This can be modeled in the form of set points implemented as
adaptive thresholds/bounds that increase each time a cell fires; preventing any cell from firing too readily. At this
level of homeostatic characterization, it may be useful to consider coupling homeostatic functions together: Figure
3 (Left) shows one homeostatic regulator, conditioned on transduced signals, that adjusts the set-point of another
homeostatic process. A possible design choice (see Figure 3 Left) could include a stacked form of recursive
manipulation [55, 119, 116], giving rise to an action-perception system or ‘open-ended metabolism’ [117]: here, a
base transducer-comparator-actuator unit is placed within another similar base unit, but the control signal output
of its set-point is wired to modify the set-point of the original base unit. Inspired by the layered, intricate patterns
of the metabolic regulation observed in biological entities, where homeostasis is carried out via enzyme activity
that manages the flux of metabolic pathways [316], a mortal computer would implement multiple variants of
homeostatic control mechanisms. Intrinsic control mechanisms could change the operating conditions of certain
metabolic functions based on higher-level set-point values, while extrinsic processes could trigger routines that
copy/delete particular variable constructs, e.g., routines akin to cell division, specialization, or apoptosis
(programmed cell death) [90], based on specific transduced values from outside the system’s boundary.
Supervening on the homeostatic-reactive level is the predictive regulation level entailing allostatic processes. Such
allostatic functions could be implemented as neural circuits, e.g., leaky integrators within a neuromorphic chip,
which trigger higher-level motor command actions. These types of functions could, for example, interact with the
homeostatic ones by modifying their set-points in response to information received by distal transducers/sensors
within the system; see Figure 3 (Right). Allostatic functions could be made progressively more complex by
integrating memory structures that recurrently capture long-term correlations in sensory streams and promote a
temporal, sequential setting of set-points of homeostatic comparators. Given that a mortal computer is an open
system operating at a nonequilibrium steady-state, its allostatic processes are built under the premise that
homeostatic set points change due to its environment and must ensure stability in the face of such variation [318]),
i.e., instantiating homeorhesis. Such higher-order processes would initiate complex pathways for adaptation in the
face of a challenge, such as an external threat that would damage the mortal computer’s morphology, and would
shut off once the “challenge” has passed, as in living systems [235]. The top-level view, the autopoietic autonomy
level, of a mortal computer includes its morphogenetic and replication processes. It is these that make a mortal
computer ‘autopoietic’. This layer includes descriptions of the regenerative and repairing behaviors of the levels
below as well as separate creation/destruction routines, i.e., complementary neural circuit manufacturing,
assignment/specialization/re-wiring routines that trigger based on a surplus of component parts, or even simple
variable cloning/deletion. The specification of the generation/repairing behavior could relate to catabolic/anabolic
functions of essential primitives, since such mechanisms provide the foundational production and removal engines
that engender a mortal computing system’s continual remaking. In addition, specification of the forms of higher-
order replication would go into this description level, noting that, if mutation is introduced, mechanisms for system-
level reproduction are possible. Essentially, through replication and morphogenetic processes, the system is able
to self-sustain its ‘identity’, continuously producing itself, without external intervention.
7 Given that homeostatic regulation naturally varies across organisms, determining what are the right homeostatic
variables to regulate will likely be dependent on the hardware at play that will carry out core computations.
8
Preprint
Figure 3: (Left) A simple mortal computer built with coupled homeostatic set-point comparators – in this system, one set-
point comparator sets the set-point of another (lower-level) one. (Right) An allostatic mechanistic system – here, a predictor
(that is memory-driven) anticipates the needs of a lower-level comparator, biasing the system to act so as to improve
resources available to the homeostatic process. Orange modules represent sensors (transducers), and pink modules
represent actuators (that control intake and secretion, depending on the direction of the flow arrow). Solid lines represent
transduced information signals while dashed lines represent control signals.
Another foundational aspect of the mortal computer in Figure 2 (Top) is its sensorimotor dependencies. This is
motivated by metabolic-dependent/based processing and adaptivity in biology [111]: the central impetus behind
a cell’s motility, e.g., chemotaxis [349, 112] or phototaxis [187, 32], and its interaction with its niche is its metabolic
drive [88, 324, 12]. Sensors/transducers and effectors/actuators exhibit, to varying degrees depending on the
design of the system and the morphology afforded by it, dependencies on metabolic functions and regulatory
processes. In Figure 2, these are labeled as ‘allostatic influence’, ‘homeostatic influence’, and ‘metabolic influence’.
For instance, the operation of a motor subsystem might be conditioned on a subset of essential variables, the set-
points of several homeostatic comparators, and control signals emitted from one or more allostatic controllers.
How such dependencies modulate or alter the functionality of a particular sensory or actuator subsystem would
depend on the system’s substrate as well as its niche. It is through the sensorimotor pathway that energy/matter
is exchanged with the mortal computer as it engages with its niche.
Finally, notice in Figure 2 (Top) that the dotted bounding box that encloses the mortal computer’s functional levels
and sensorimotor pathways is labeled as ‘organizationally closed’ – a mortal computer should operate solely on the
basis of its own self-reproduced structures, rather than on the inputs it directly receives. While it is important for
a mortal computer to be organizationally closed, this does not commit a designer to a specific physical
manifestation. Simply put, organization refers to the relationships between the system’s processes and parts. The
mortal computer’s structure refers to the physical instantiation of the constituent components and their
relationships. One organization can be manifested in many structural forms. This means that, since it is autopoietic,
a mortal computer’s structure might change with time, but its organization persists. A mortal computer’s responses
are dependent on — and determined by — its structure but also triggered by environmental events. This means a
mortal computer, like a living system, is constantly interacting with and thus coupled to its world as indicated by
the directed arrows of ‘sensing’, ‘actuation’, and ‘energy exchange’ in Figure 2 (Top). In short, the full story of a
mortal computer includes its niche: the mortal computer and its environment mutually perturb each other and
trigger changes in the state of one another.
3.2 The Cybernetics Backend of a Mortal Computer
Some of the key ideas that underlie this view of mortal computing come from classical cybernetics [351, 25, 364,
39, 105, 167, 270, 169], a field that can be characterized by the core idea that any system is, in effect, a generative
model that acts as a model of the environment that it controls. The structure of an organism, in and of itself, is
taken to be part of a (control as) inference process. A key biophysical term that was notably associated with this
framing was homeostasis, demonstrated by Ashby’s famous homeostat [24]. These cybernetical notions echo many
of those in physiology, strengthening the view that mortal computation must first be grounded in its structure and
implicit mechanisms. At the core of cybernetics is the notion of ‘retroaction’ – a system’s directive is to, in a
somewhat Kantian fashion [192], incorporate its “ends” (i.e., goals) into the “means” (i.e., mechanisms), to ensure
that attainment of its goals is (almost) inevitable. A central question that retroaction prompts is: how is it possible
for a system to learn what it needs to know, so as to act effectively?
9
Preprint
This question motivates a complementary characterization of mortal computation, i.e., its ‘cybernetics backend’ as
seen in Figure 2 (Bottom), a particular synthesis of cybernetical principles or axioms [25, 167]. Foundationally,
cybernetics is about the system, which is treated as consisting of elementary parts and their local interactions,
which exhibit collective dynamics [178, 311] from which overall order might spontaneously arise, given sufficient
energy [28, 101, 191, 22, 193, 168, 94, 352]. In such a system, the parts give rise to the ‘whole’ (upward causation),
and constrain it, to a degree, while the whole constrains the constituent parts, making them act so as to conform
to the laws of the higher levels defined by the system (downward causation) [70]. To completely understand a
system in cybernetical terms, particularly its relationship to an environment, one must start with the primary
currency of cybernetics; namely, variety.
Variety, simply put, is the measure of the number of distinguishable states in a system’s state space [23] or
log (|𝑆|), where |S| indicates the cardinality of the state space S.8 Variety can further be interpreted as the degrees
2
of freedom that a system has in choosing in what specific state it will be. Changes in variety characterize a system’s
evolution and, importantly, variety may be reduced through selection [169], which is the criteria used to classify
which states are stable and which are not. To furnish a perspective on mortal computation, we partition the
cybernetic principles into three complementary groups: 1) stability, 2) growth, and 3) regulation/control. In Figure
2 (Bottom), we depict the core relationships among these groups, centering around regulation/control.
The Quest for Stability. The primary imperative for a system, e.g., a mortal computer (see leftmost third of Figure
2 Bottom), is to reach states of stability (i.e., an attracting set of states). The ideal state for a system to end up is
one of ultrastability, where the system has reached a form of self-organization that allows it to converge to an
attracting state without altering its part-to-part relationships, i.e., it has developed feedback-driven step-
mechanisms that alter internal variables in response to environment perturbations [364, 21]. It is here that the
principle of asymmetric transition applies: it is possible for a system in an unstable (high energy) configuration to
transition to a stable (low energy) one, but not the converse. This means that a system is implicitly performing a
selection, leaving a region in state space with high variety to a region with lower energy. As the system rejects fewer
states as it reaches more stable ones, the variety decreases as the system becomes more organized and, if one
equates variety with (thermodynamic free) energy, a system must do work and thus exert variation. Therefore, if a
system is stable, it does not undergo variation and can be viewed to be in a state with minimal energy; thus, the
system is less likely to expend the energy needed to leave its current stable state.
In the effort to reach stable states, the principles of selective variety and order-from-noise apply: the greater the
variety of the configurations/states that a system undergoes, the more likely it will retain at least one of these states
(the first principle), while random perturbations that buffet the system will aid it in finding more stable states (the
second principle). In other words, noise will increase a system’s chances of finding more stable states, increasing its
fitness in the long-run. In complement to this, the principle of blind-variation and selective retention (BVSR) [68, 69,
312] posits that configurations produced through ‘blind variation’, i.e., the system cannot know which states will be
selected by its actions a priori, will likely lead it to transition to a stable state, which will less likely be eliminated
compared to less stable ones. As a consequence, a system’s evolution is conservative, i.e., stable configurations are
retained, thus exploited, while unstable ones vanish [69].
System Growth. The second key quality of a cybernetical system is that it is morphological and morphogenetic,
thus capable of growth and replication (see rightmost third of Figure 2 Bottom). This connects back to the framing
of a mortal computer as autopoietic, which required that it had the ability to regenerate and self-repair, while
preserving its coordinated-whole. From the cybernetics viewpoint, a system is morphological if it is able to offload
or carry out some calculations — necessary for navigating an environment — to its bodily structure, i.e., its
morphological form.9 Morphogenesis then refers to the system-environment exchanges that shape the particular
form of a system [332, 360, 334, 157]. A morphogenetic system, from a cybernetics point-of-view, is one that
maintains its continuity and integrity by altering essential aspects of its organization and/or structure [49]. Note
that a morphogenetic process may be triggered by changing environmental conditions. In biology, this could be the
regeneration of multicellular structures in response to external damage, and can explain the emergence of patterns
8 If a system has 2 states, then there is only one possible difference/distinction; variety is equal to one.
9 This has become increasingly important in the domain of robotics, resulting in what is known as morphological robotics
[223, 276, 164, 210, 211]. For example, much as animals exploit the material properties of their legs’ elastic muscle-tendon
system to reduce the computation that their brains perform, robots with leg actuators work to exploit bio-mechanical
properties of those legs to engage in locomotion and thus reduce required internal physics-based calculations [276].
10
Preprint
in both artificial and living systems, e.g., well-known examples include ‘Turing patterns’ [334] and ‘morphogens’ for
cell type coordination/generation [360]. Self-replication, which we view as building on morphogenesis, is a system’s
behavior that results in identical/similar copies of itself or parts of itself. A well-known example in biology is cell
mitosis, i.e., division. In cybernetics, aspects of the principle of replication come from work on cellular automata
[209], with origins as early as the Von Neumann universal constructor [345] and the “game of life” [148, 48]. In
essence, a base set of cybernetical qualifications — for a system to be self-replicating — is that it must generally
have: 1) a ‘code’ representation of the replicator, 2) a mechanism to ‘copy’ the coded representation, and 3) a
mechanism for carrying out the construction within the replicator’s environment [345]. A replication process that
yields an imperfect copy of its source (e.g., a mutation is applied) becomes subject to natural selection and pursues
its own quest for stability as described above; this “offspring” is another basis by which a system’s organization —
its identity — is propagated over time.
If a system reaches a nonequilibrium steady state, and is self-replicating and morphogenetic, then the principle of
autocatalytic growth [194] comes into play — a positive feedback loop is created such that explosive growth is
possible and the system will replicate, and given finite resources, systems that are less fit will die due to competition.
Autocatalytic growth, in tandem with the principle of BVSR, drives the self-assembly of a system that is
distinguishable from its environment due to its morphological boundary; this is the cybernetical form of autopoiesis.
This also gives rise to the principle of recursive system growth, where interacting self-stable systems, each with their
own boundaries, acts as a set of related building blocks that will undergo variation and thus recombination to yield
higher-order configurations; some of which will be more stable than others. Much as the base systems underwent
selection to reach stability, so will the higher-order assembly and, as a result, hierarchical and heterarchical (“nearly
decomposable”) systems [310, 189] will emerge.10 Given that autocatalytic growth underpins the principle of
recursive growth, when a stable state assembly makes it easier for other building block systems to join, the number
of its constituent building blocks will grow [178, 290].
Regulation and Control. The third and final aspect of mortal computing — that we seek to articulate through the
lens of cybernetics — is its relationship to its environment through regulation and control. Here, three foundational
notions come into play: the law of requisite variety, the good regulator theorem, and the principle of internal model
control. The law of requisite variety [200, 27] states that a controller can only control a target system, e.g., an
environment, if it exhibits sufficient internal variety to represent it; the system should embody the minimum
number of states needed to obtain ultrastability [21]. In the context of active regulation, the mortal computer must
have at its disposal a sufficient variety of actions to ensure that there will be little variety in the outcomes of its
essential variables; it must be capable of handling the variability inherent to its environment. This, in effect, relates
to a mortal computer’s ability to maintain its internal states, i.e., its homeostasis, in response to external ones. If it
is treated as a ‘blocker’ that prevents environmental disturbances on (metabolic) variables, for it to be useful, this
blocker should have as much flexibility as that which it is blocking; otherwise, it will fail to prevent perturbation to
the variables that it blocks [280]. A consequence of requisite variety is that for a system to exert sufficient control
over its environment, it should try to maximize its internal variety to be optimally prepared for perturbations that
it might encounter; maximizing internal entropy increases its cybernetic freedom or options for action [119, 118].
In the context of this balance — between internal and external variety — emerges the good regulator theorem [91],
also known as the law of requisite knowledge [167]. The good regulator theorem states that every self-regulating
controller of an environment must itself contain a model of that environment. This theorem implies that the
regulator, e.g., a mortal computer, becomes a model of the niche that it seeks to control and, more generally, that
the system’s survival requires forming, learning, and maintaining a model of its environment. This is essential for
reaching ultrastability. A useful complement to the good regulator theorem is the principle of internal model control
(IMC) [131], which dictates that the purpose of a controller that manages an environment, is, first, to provide closed-
loop stability, and second, to regulate a variable that is a function of the target’s output and a reference signal. IMC
asserts that, if a system preserves these two properties when certain system parameters are perturbed, then the
“synthesis”, or joint controller-environment system, is deemed structurally stable. The IMC principle helpfully
connects a mortal computer’s adaptation to its environment back to one of its central directions; achieving stability
far from equilibrium.
Cybernetical Framing. As can be seen in Figure 2 (Bottom), the cybernetics backend of a mortal computer
characterizes its collective dynamics, emergent behavior, and relationship with an environment based on the
principles above. The mortal computer or ‘generative controller’ (depicted as a two-level system for simplicity),
comprises low-level parts, which could be the base essential variables in Section 3.1, that have relationships
10 Note that larger assemblies, made with fewer building blocks at their particular (time-)scale, have a lower probability of
arising via blind variation.
11
Preprint
(possibly bidirectional ones) with each other, as indicated by the black arrows. Clusters of these low-level units give
rise to higher-level units (shown as purplish squares), which also have relationships to each other; lower-level units
upwardly cause higher-level ones and higher-level units downwardly modulate the low-level ones.
The imperative of the mortal computer is to reach stable configurations of low energy. Upon reaching more stable
configurations, it is unlikely to return to previously stables ones of higher variety (the principle of asymmetric
transition). Furthermore, due to the principles of order-from-noise and selective variety, random fluctuations in the
environment enable it to continually find more stable configurations. The mortal computer’s imperative is to reach
ultrastability, also viewed as successful homeostasis. The environment is a crucial factor in a mortal computer’s
evolution towards stability; it holds the resources that the system needs to drive its self-generation processes and
thus its self-assembly. Given that the mortal computer is autopoietic and self-replicating, due to the principles of
BVSR in tandem with autocatalytic growth, it is able to recursively grow itself as it adapts to its niche. Finally, given
that a mortal computer is generative, in that it brings about its environment through action — and learns about its
properties via sensors (encoding this knowledge into memory) — it operates as a good regulator, working to be a
model of internal control. The key is that, as a result of the self-assembly that promotes its morphogenesis, the
mortal computer exhibits enough internal variety in comparison to the variety of its environment so as to ensure
its continued persistence.
In terms of the cybernetical variety, we may then understand the evolution of a mortal computer over time through
its connection to the physical world. The physical world itself consists of particles (in space-time) and energy flow
(caused by forces across these particles), resulting in an ever-changing configuration/state of particles. This means
that, at any one point in time, the environment is in a specific configuration that is different from any other. As a
consequence, the differences between the universe’s configurations are what a system will be concerned with,
where information pertains to these differences [35].11 The mortal computer perceives these differences in its
interactions with its world, and responds by adjusting its internal states, thus maintaining organizational closure.
As a result, information embodied in a mortal computer’s configuration or structure self-organizes to correlate with
the patterns that it perceives and responds to in its surroundings. Notably, cellular automata (or artificial life [209])
embody many of the above principles, have been shown to exhibit non-equilibrium dynamics [358], and, in light of
our cybernetics backend, serve as a possible minimal model of a mortal computer based on simple transition rules.
3.3 A Cognitive-Philosophical Grounding for Mortal Computing: 5E Theory
Thus far, we have established an implementational view of mortal computation through biophysics and an analytic
view of it through cybernetics. Building on these results, we now consider its cognitive-philosophical grounding.
Concretely, we break down a mortal computer into its ‘cognitive slices’ to manifest what we will call a 5E Theory of
Cognition. In cognitive science, 4E cognitive theory [146, 337, 248] categorizes processing into four groups:
embodied, enactive, embedded, and extended cognition. In this work, mortal computation is cast in terms of a
form of 4E theory that we extend to include ‘elementary cognition’ or, in biology, ‘basal cognition’, which
characterizes the behavior inherent to all living entities based on functionality that existed prior to nervous systems
[219, 224, 123, 124]. This gives rise to a 5E theory of cognition, depicted in Figure 4, described below:
1. Elementary: Cognition stands on fundamental functions and structures that enable acting and tracking aspects of a
niche to ensure survival, i.e., finding food, avoiding danger, and to reproduce [229, 275] – this is basal cognition [219,
224], which manifests through a system’s autopoiesis;
2. Embodied: Cognition cannot be described in terms of abstract mental processes and representations alone, i.e., it
must involve the entire body/morphology of the living system (the body serves as a constraint on the brain and/or a
distributor/realizer of cognition) [18, 128] – this is the embodiment thesis [18, 9, 128, 342, 308];
3. Enactive: Cognition is the set of meaningful relationships determined by an adaptive two-way exchange between the
biological and phenomenological complexity of living creatures and the environments they inhabit and actively shape
[291, 331, 147] – this is enactivism;
4. Embedded: Cognition is not an isolated event, separated from the living entity’s econiche, i.e., an entity displays layers
of co-determination with physical, social, and cultural aspects of the world [329, 82, 63, 278, 38] – this is situated
cognition or situatedness [293]; and
5. Extended: Cognition is often offloaded into biological beings and non-biological devices to serve as functions that
would be impossible/too difficult to achieve by only relying on the agent’s own mental processes – this is extended
mind theory [86, 356, 84, 185] (the mind extends beyond the boundaries of an individual).
11 This is a more physical, grounded manner in which to interpret the cybernetical notion of variety.
12
Preprint
Figure 4: Mortal computing manifested by slices of interrelated cognition: basal cognitive functionality (autopoietic drive),
morphological/bodily functionality, enactive niche-influenced functionality, and externally-driven functionality. Mortal
computers, of increasing complexity, would be manifestations of the life-mind continuity thesis.
Notice that, when accounting for all five of its tenets, the above 5E theory connects not only an entity’s mental
processes to its life-sustaining processes [339, 234], its body or morphological structure, and its biological niche
but also to the collective dynamics/processes beyond the individual system, e.g., multi-agent groups, abstract
organizational constructs. This can include elements that are not physical manifestations, e.g., social constructs and
cultural expectations that situate cognitive function [293], as well as non-biological objects, e.g., technological
artifacts such as pen/paper or intelligent phones.
This stands in contrast to isolated cognition theories where neural/mental processes are the sole drivers of
cognitive behavior [127, 160, 176, 177]. Through the lens of the first three E’s of 5E theory, a mortal computer can
be explained as responding selectively to its niche, consistently regulating its boundaries, i.e., engaging in
autopoietic enactivism [97], so as to ensure that it does not dissipate or dissolve into its environment. The
success/failure of its responses to maintain its low-level primitives/states – which are linked to its biophysical
homeostasis or cybernetic ultrastability – are intrinsically determined by its body/morphology [347, 15], subject to
a selection history. However, while our focus has been on how mortal computation centers around how self-
regulation, bodily structures, and the niche shape computations, an entity’s survival and continued existence would
certainly be affected by its interaction with other actors, e.g., other mortal computers, in its world as well as its use
of available non-living objects/tools. Extended cognitive systems, under this notion, can then be taken to include
neural, non-neural, and beyond-the-body [86] (e.g., a spider’s woven web [185]) aspects of the organism’s
environment. It is possible to push the view of the body’s role in cognitive functionality further: instead of treating
non-neural structures as (auxiliary) resources that serve disembodied cognitive processes, one can view them as
substitutions for what would require complex internal mental representations [308], i.e., the replacement
hypothesis.
In Figure 4 (right panel), we depict the groupings of 5E cognitive theory, arranged in a bottom-to-top depiction of
increasing cognitive complexity and effect. Basal cognitive functionality, which encompasses the regulatory
processes that manage essential primitives as well as the base forms of selection and navigation that emerge in
organisms through natural selection, is placed underneath embodied cognition; even though it manifests itself
through a living system’s morphology/organization. In the left half of the diagram, we depict the cognitive slices
(scopes) that would characterize a mortal computer: 1) elementary cognition (functionality through autopoiesis),
2) morphological cognition (functionality through bodily structure/form), 3) enactive cognition (functionality
through interaction between a body and its niche and vice versa), and 4) externalized cognition (functionality
through the out-of-system entities including other mortal computers and non-mortal objects). The cognitive scopes,
as indicated by the purple arrows, depend on and modulate each other. Morphological cognition is intimately
motivated by homeorhetic/allostatic mechanisms inherent to basal cognition. Enactive cognition depends on the
morphology producing actions so as to manipulate/respond to the environment thus triggering a consequence as
the effect of its causal action. External cognition requires participation of the mortal computer in a collective of
others, including relevant abstract norms and standards, and the results of this externalized cognitive processing
would produce top-down modulating effects on the mortal computer’s basal level.
13
Preprint
Figure 5: A cell in terms of its internal states 𝑧, environmental states o, and its Markov blanket: sensory 𝑠 and action 𝑎
states. Arcs are conditional probabilistic relationships between nodes.
Examining mortal computation through the lens of 5E theory licenses a characterization in terms of increasing
complexity according to cognitive functionality. As in Figure 4, study of its behavior could be made through one
cognitive slice, e.g., one might want to focus on its embodied functionality (what affordances [155] does the
system’s body provide) as opposed to its extended functionality (how the system uses tools). This also warrants
consideration of the relationships between the cognitive scopes, e.g., functions offered at the basal cognitive base
dictate the morphological cognitive functions that are possible which affect the system’s enactive functionality.
Note that 5E theory’s cognitive scoping casts mortal computing in terms of a spectrum between simple and
complex systems, much as the life-mind continuity thesis12 does for brains/minds [144, 198].
4 A Free Energy Framing of Mortal Computation
Motivated by the foregoing biophysical, cybernetical, and philosophical-cognitive perspectives, we move to a
theoretical backbone for mortal computation, which we will call mortal inference-learning and selection (MILS).
MILS foregrounds the separation of the temporal scales that characterize a system and its optimal behavior in terms
of three processes that all organisms engage in: inference, learning, and the selection of adaptive structures. To
characterize these three processes, we start by reviewing the Markov blanket construct and ensuing free energy
principle. Furthermore, we foreground the distinction between the morphic and amorphic, as this will distinguish
computational systems that are inherently mortal from those that are not.
4.1 A Theoretical Starting Point: Free Energy
The free energy principle asserts that for entities to maintain their structural and functional integrity, they must
change their relationship with their econiche through action. From a biophysics perspective, the free energy
principle (FEP) characterizes the self-organization of open random dynamical systems that actively resist a natural
tendency to disorder, or, in other words, remain measurable/identifiable as distinct, persistent entities over some
macroscopic time-scale [137]. According to the FEP, any entity with a non-equilibrium steady-state solution (NESS)13
possesses the following properties: 1) its internal density dynamics are conditionally independent of the system’s
environment; i.e., the environment and the system are weakly coupled and the entity has states that are distinct
12 The life-mind continuity thesis states that the origins of mind are tied to the origins of systems that actively persist (living
ones), as opposed to those that passively persist such as thermostats or coupled pendulum systems [198].
13 A living system must be in a non-equilibrium state given that such a state means that there is a net flow of energy/power
and/or material through it – such states are not self-sustaining and thus require implicit or explicit energy. This is a critical
condition for life since energy will be used to drive the process(es) for intake/removal of matter from the system. As a result,
if no energy/matter is input into the system, the system will relax to equilibrium and thus “die”.
14
Preprint
from its external or environmental states, and 2) it will continually ‘self-evidence’ [177] by returning to, or close to,
its NESS; i.e., the entity behaves so as to preserve its functional integrity and its dynamics do not diverge when a
perturbation is applied. Note that these two properties resonate with our earlier conception that a mortal
computer is autopoietically enactive and works towards ultrastability.
Characterizing a Mortal Computer with Markov Blankets. As a result of the above weak coupling and local
interactions — as prescribed by FEP’s two core properties — the full (joint) state space of the system, e.g., a mortal
computer and environment, can be partitioned into external/environment states 𝒪 ={𝑜(𝑡)}|𝒪| , internal/system
𝑖 𝑖=1
states 𝒵 ={𝑧(𝑡)}|𝒵| , and intermediate states ℳ ={𝑚 (𝑡)}|ℳ| , also known as (Markov blanket) states.14
𝑖 𝑖=1 𝑖 𝑖=1
The Markov blanket construct [273] acts as the interface between what is inside the entity and what exists outside
of it [174] and is manifested within the morphological boundary of Sections 3.1 and 3.2. It can also be described as
a statistical neighborhood that consists of all states that are parents of those in {z(t)}, children of those in {z(t)},
or parents of the children states of {z(t)} [85]. Crucially, the Markov blanket object provides the necessary
partitioning of states as required by FEP’s core properties: states that are not included in the relationships described
(parents, children, and parents of children of z(t)) provide no further information about internal states z(t),
meaning that z(t) is conditionally independent of environment states o(t) given the presence of m(t). Given that
they describe how an entity perceives and acts on its niche, the Markov blanket states can be further decomposed
into two sets of states: sensory states 𝒮 ={𝑠(𝑡)}|𝒮| that mediate the effect of external states on internal states,
𝑖 𝑖=1
active states 𝒜 ={𝑎 (𝑡)}|𝒜| that mediate the effects of internal states on external ones.
𝑖 𝑖=1
To ground the notion of a Markov blanket in the context of mortal entities, consider a neuronal cell. The Markov
blanket would, in this case, take the form of the cell’s surface and separate intracellular from extracellular elements.
The neuron’s sensed environment is dictated by the sensory structures that it deploys, which include post-synaptic
receptors and channels, as well as distributed biochemical and bioelectric sensors and subsystems for material
pumping/secretion. Formally, the neuron’s sensed environment is {s(t)}, the set of activities produced by its post-
synaptic specializations, and its actions upon the environment are mediated by {a(t)}, the set of activities generated
by its pre-synaptic specializations. Again, the sets {s(t)} and {a(t)} comprise the neuron’s Markov blanket and its
perception and action are crucially linked by the dynamics of its internal states which are constrained by the cell’s
internal structure, e.g., its genome, mitochondria, other organelles, the cytoskeletal network, etc., or — as we will
see below — its generative (i.e., world) model.
The cell acts to regulate the bio-electrochemical gradients that it detects as state variations of {s(t)}. The cell’s
inputs and outputs are spatially organized by its morphology and the cell is able to detect local alterations to its
morphology, e.g., strain on its cytoskeleton. The function of the cell and its output/actions depend on its dynamics,
i.e., the internal computational message-passing architecture, and thus on its morphology. In essence, the cell’s
morphology determines its function, which determines the actions it takes in its environment (here the neuronal
network in which it is embedded). In Figure 5, we depict a Markov blanket characterization of our neuronal cell.
Note that, under the Markov blanket formalism, we may say that the cell engages in its autopoiesis by maintaining
its Markov blanket boundary, i.e., cell membrane, whereas non-living systems that do exhibit persistent local
dynamics do not, i.e., a campfire dissipates rapidly in the flux of the universe, as it is extinguished by a downpour
of rain.
Variational Free Energy. Formally, the FEP claims that the internal and active (i.e., autonomous) states of an entity
evolve so as to minimize its variational free energy (VFE), which is an upper bound on self information or surprisal15.
VFE, in effect, quantifies the discrepancy between a variational density parameterized by internal states and the
probability density over external states conditioned on the blanket states. This interpretation of autonomous
(internal and active) dynamics follows in a straightforward way from the conditional dependencies implied by the
Markov blanket partition, where an entity is defined as possessing a Markov blanket.
The functional form of VFE can be written in the following manner (see [85, 137] for details):
ℱ(𝑚(𝑡),𝑧(𝑡)) = KL(𝑞 (𝑜(𝑡))||𝑝(𝑜(𝑡)))−𝔼 [log𝑝(𝑚(𝑡)|𝑜(𝑡))] (1)
𝑧 𝑞𝑧
= KL(𝑞 (𝑜(𝑡))||𝑝(𝑜(𝑡)|𝑚(𝑡)))−log𝑝(𝑚(𝑡))≥ −log𝑝(𝑚(𝑡)) (2)
𝑧
14 Here, t refers to time and |𝒪| denotes cardinality of set 𝒪. Note that i indexes a specific value of the state; omission of this
index refers to an arbitrary/generic state.
15 The improbability of an event or how unlikely an observation would be when associated with a system sensory state.
15
Preprint
where KL(∘ ||∘ ) denotes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which is a non-negative quantity that scores the
difference between two probability distributions. We further indicate that the entity has a morphology 𝒬 that
structures internal states. Here internal states could correspond to synaptic activity that changes quickly and
synaptic efficacies µ, in a neural circuit, which change slowly. The second equality shows that VFE is an upper bound
on the negative log probability of blanket states; namely the self-information or surprisal of blanket states. From a
statistical (Bayesian model selection) perspective, minimizing variational free energy implicitly maximizes model
evidence or marginal likelihood, i.e., the likelihood of an exchange with the environment, having marginalized over
external states. This reading of the VFE licenses the notion of self-evidencing; namely, a description of entities,
whose autonomous states increase model evidence (to within a bound approximation).
Equation 2 indicates that an entity can be read as inferring the states of the environment, via 𝑞 (𝑜(𝑡)) , which can
𝑧
be contrasted with the true state of the environment conditioned on the Markov blanket 𝑝(𝑜(𝑡)|𝑚(𝑡)) . This
contrast is, effectively, the system’s prediction error, under the entity’s generative model 𝒬 [227, 96, 172, 365]. In
other words, one can interpret the dynamics or gradient flows of autonomous states as minimizing some prediction
error, based upon the predictions of sensory states afforded by internal states, whose dynamics evolve under some
internal structure 𝒬. Technically, the generative model entailed by 𝒬 is expressed as a joint probability density
over the joint states of the system.
This joint density or generative model just is the system’s NESS. In other words, the NESS density furnishes a
probabilistic specification of the relationship between environment/external states and the states that constitute
the entity in question. Given that the Markov blanket encompasses both sensory and active states, gradient flows
on VFE (e.g., neuronal dynamics) can be understood in terms of active inference [140]: namely, internal states can
be read as engaged in Bayesian belief updating, while active states mediate an active exploration of the
environment in service of precluding surprising (i.e., uncharacteristic) states and thus remaining ‘alive’.
The FEP offers a generic theory of self-organization via self-evidencing for entities with sufficient dynamical stability
to be identified over time (i.e., technically, for entities that possess a pullback attractor or set of attracting or
characteristic states). Thus, an entity is considered to be a ‘thing’ that is distinct from its surrounding environment
given that its Markov blanket assures conditional independence between its internal states and the
environment/external states, i.e., its operational closure — constraining the interaction (or information exchange)
between them to be local. Notice that the form of self-organization dictated by Equation 2 ties in with our
cybernetics back-end of mortal computing; particularly, the good regulator theorem and IMC.
The VFE in Equation 2 further shows that this NESS density can be factorized into a likelihood for external states
given the Markov blanket (states) and a prior density (over external states). It is the priors that characterize its
preferred states, i.e., the attractors of cybernetical stability, and thereby underwrite internal message-passing or
dynamics. Given that a mortal computer will exhibit a preference over states16 via its NESS density, we can say that
such an entity will return to the same neighborhood of states in its state-space throughout the course of its life-
span. In other words, it will avoid a large number of (surprisingly low probability) states and occupy, with a high
probability, a small number of states [285]. In other words, to exist as an entity, a mortal computer simply occupies
the kinds of states that are characteristic of the kind of thing it is. These are the low variety states of cybernetic
[ultra]stability.
This — almost tautological — expression of the FEP becomes useful when instantiating mortal computers. This
follows because a mortal computer can learn its generative model (via a process of structure learning or Bayesian
model comparison – see below). When a mortal computer is equipped with a generative model its autonomous
dynamics, i.e., belief updating and action, are fully determined by gradient flows on the variational free energy
functional of that model. Crucially, this means that one can simulate mortal computation by simply solving the
equations of motion above for any given generative model (i.e., probabilistic specification of characteristic states).
Note that, with the Markov blanket considered as part of the system, Equation 2 implies that every mortal
computing system is, in a sense, autonomous and interacts with only one other system, i.e., its environment. This
also suggests that both the mortal computer and its environment maintain their own well-defined, conditionally
16 A ‘prior preference’ or prior expectations about how environment’s states will evolve/unfold across time [140].
16
Preprint
independent states, where each adapts to the other’s actions [205] as resources allow. This can be read as the
enactive cognition of the mortal computer, as per Section 3.3.
The Markov blanket is the interface between the system and environment and, as in [122, 121], can be treated as
a holographic screen in quantum formulations of the FEP. In both classical and quantum information theoretic
formulations, the entity does not have access to its environment’s structure; it can only sense aspects of it through
the mutually correlated system-environment components of the Markov blanket. The observed sector of the
Markov blanket serves as the read/write exchange between the system’s internal dynamics and the environment
and vice versa. We note that the notion of a Markov blanket can be applied recursively as well, i.e., we can consider,
for example, complex systems to comprise a multiplicity of (nested) blankets that engage in self-assembly [198].
Inference. Given the above account of VFE, the process of inference, or the performing of short-term computations,
can be expressed in accordance with Equation 2, since autonomous states follow a gradient flow on variational free
energy [141]. This allows us to characterize the system’s information processing as well as how its internal states
change with time:
𝜕𝑧(𝑡) 𝜕ℱ(𝑚(𝑡),𝑧(𝑡))
= .
𝜕𝑡 𝜕𝑧(𝑡)
This ordinary differential equation depends on the system’s morphology 𝒬 as well as the current value of the
blanket states at time t. Computationally, let us consider a predictive coding circuit [288, 133, 259] or Kalman filter
[190, 289] as specific examples that follow VFE gradient flows; such implementations work to adjust or ‘error-
correct’ their z(t), which corresponds to the stateful activity values of their internal units or neurons (arranged in
a heterarchy) as sensory data patterns are assimilated. These models adapt their dynamics, i.e., those that govern
internal activity, leveraging synaptic feedback pathways to predict incoming sensory stimuli. This happens at a fast
time-scale and generally occurs each time sensory states are perturbed, or data are made available. Exactly the
same gradient flows play out at a slower timescale, when considering that some internal states encode external
variables that change slowly (e.g., laws, contingencies and regularities in the environment). This leads to the first
separation of timescales; moving from inference about states to learning model parameters.
Learning. Learning in a mortal computing system — e.g., synaptic plasticity in the presence of pre- and post-synaptic
fluctuations — generally occurs at a slower time-scale than inference. Crucially, learning operates in accordance
with Equation 2, and is responsible for storing useful information over longer periods, serving as a building block
for (associative) memory that works in service of influencing the system’s fast inference dynamics. The learning
process of a system could be characterized as a mechanism that manipulates or alters a subset of internal variables
— namely, parameters µ — that parameterize the variational density q z. Specifically, this is done using the relevant
gradients of VFE resulting in the differential equation:
𝜕𝜇 𝜕ℱ(𝑚(𝑡),𝑧(𝑡))
= .
𝜕𝑡 𝜕𝜇
This is the kind of learning found in backpropagation of errors (backprop) with an important twist: under the free
energy principle, the VFE gradients can be computed locally, leading to a local energy-based schemes that
grandfather extensions of predictive coding and Bayesian filtering to learn parameters of a generative model, in
addition to inferring states that are hidden behind the Markov blanket, i.e., hidden, external or latent states.
Notice that learning depends on internal states and blanket states taking on particular values, meaning that the
learning must be scheduled according to the pace of inference. Changes to parameters — e.g., a weighted addition
of a Hebbian-like update to a synapse — proceed at a slower timescale, accumulating statistical regularities and
assimilating causal dependencies in the environment. Using our earlier example of predictive coding [288, 259,
298], this can be achieved — in an approximate fashion — by appealing to the expectation-maximization framework
[100], where inference is carried out over K steps and synaptic parameters are adjusted after each set of K steps.
Selection and Structure Learning. From the perspective of the FEP, optimization of structure and morphology
means that the mortal computer will minimize its VFE or, equivalently, maximize its morphological (model)
evidence. We can express this as a gradient flow based on the morphological constructs:
17
Preprint
𝜕𝒬 𝜕ℱ(𝑚(𝑡),𝑧(𝑡))
=
𝜕𝑡 𝜕𝒬
where the structure 𝒬 is entailed by model parameters. In machine intelligence research, which generally focuses
on providing accounts of inference (e.g., a feedforward pass in a deep neural network) and learning (e.g., adjusting
connection weights for parameters via backprop [221, 294]), this type of optimization has been considered under
various names: architecture search [222, 256, 113], hyperparameter optimization [47, 315, 306], structure learning
[326, 328], automatic relevance determination and so on — all driven by notions of conditional computation and
dynamically structured prediction schemes [42, 80, 41, 182, 162]. In statistics and probability, this form of structure
learning has been cast as Bayesian model selection [348, 142] or ‘sparsification’ in the context of factor graph
learning [78, 67, 149]. The aim is to develop an optimal computer by pruning model parameters to underwrite
generalization ability. When expressed as a gradient descent (as above), one is generally led to schemes that shrink
various parameters towards zero and eliminate them when, and only when, the VFE decreases, or model evidence
increases. Neurobiologically, this corresponds to synaptic selection and pruning; of the sort one might see during
synaptic homeostasis during neurodevelopment and — at a faster timescale — during the sleep-wake cycle.
The Morphic-Amorphic Distinction. As discussed towards the end of Section 3.1, gross structure was the
embodiment of a mortal computer’s organization. If we look at how morphology applies to biological entities,
certain organisms, e.g., single-celled amoeba and paramecia [150, 129], possess a three-dimensional (3D) physical
structure, also referred to as morphological ‘degrees of freedom’ [121], that has evolved over generations. A
system’s morphology imposes two core constraints: 1) a thermodynamic cost, as described earlier, that comes from
the irreversible encoding of information (writing a bit value to, or erasing it from, memory) [44]), and 2) the coupling
of information: an entity’s physical instantiation strictly determines how its inputs are obtained from, as well as
how its outputs are transferred to, its environment.
Based on this definition of morphology, we may clearly distinguish between what can be called ‘morphic’ and
‘amorphic’ entities. In essence, all biological systems are morphic. Take our example of the neuronal cell: organized
within its cell membrane, it has a sensing structure composed of post-synaptic specializations that transduce
neurotransmitters and effectors to transmit its own signals, as well as a series of pumps/secretory mechanisms.
Networks of such cells exhibit their own dynamic morphology, made up of dendritic and axonal processes of various
sizes that result in differential delays between signals [228, 218], where growing/regressing dendritic spines
promotes/inhibits synapse formation and location-specific interneural communication [66, 75, 175, 295].
Moreover, long and short-range cortical connectivity is shaped by activity-dependent pruning [274, 287, 309].
Changes to its morphology affect the network’s processing dynamics as well as its ability to adapt: its fast inference
is affected by short-term activity-dependent plasticity, while learning depends on the synaptic connections of the
functional anatomy or structure [269]. As a result of its impact on the dynamics related to learning and inference,
morphology itself is treated as a computational resource in living entities; evincing a strategy that characterizes
things ranging from neuronal networks in brains to plants and fungi and microbial biofilms [246, 363, 338, 56, 243].
In contrast to biological entities, despite modern-day computers also possessing morphologies17, the software that
is run on them does not enjoy this intimate relationship, as it is designed abstractly and independently of the
computer executing it. This is what makes such programs immortal, and makes such programs inherently amorphic.
For instance, let us consider the popular deep neural network (DNN). Writing down its characteristic inference and
learning equations can be done independently of any realization in a three-dimensional environment, despite the
fact that it is pedagogically drawn as a node-and-arrow diagram. The execution of the DNN’s program, i.e., its
inference and learning mechanisms, is then made possible by the levels of abstraction afforded by the computer’s
architecture, i.e., the compiler translates a high-level language down to routines for an assembler, which translates
these down to binary commands that adhere to an instruction architecture set (ISA). Furthermore, the resources
needed for the DNN, e.g., weight matrices containing its synaptic values and sensory data recordings, are then read
from the computer’s underlying memory hierarchy (as in Section 2) to facilitate its simulation over a period of time
on a central processing unit (CPU) or graphics processing unit (GPU).
Note that, as we have argued thus far, since a mortal computer follows the same self-evidencing principles of any
enduring entity, it is inherently morphic. Furthermore, because it is morphic, the FEP applies. This is important
because it means the mortal computer will approach the lower (Landauer) limit on thermodynamic expenditure
associated with belief updating or computation. This follows because it eludes the memory wall; i.e., the
17 Computers possess a 3D form that maximizes heat dissipation capacity and minimizes information transmission delays.
18
Preprint
Figure 6: The relationship between the notions underpinning mortal computation: 1) inference, 2) learning, and 3) the
selection of structure. Red boxes highlight the particular object of interest/in-question (a question mark next to the box
indicates the goal or question that a particular time-scale is attempting to answer/optimize).
thermodynamic cost of reading and writing, to and from memory, required in von Neumann architectures and
other amorphic computers. More generally — and intuitively — because the FEP applies to morphic computation,
a mortal computer minimizes both thermodynamic and variational free energy. This follows because the FEP states
that entities at nonequilibrium steady-state, i.e., minimizing thermodynamic free energy, can be described as
Bayes-optimal computers, i.e., minimizing VFE.
4.2 The Principle of MILS through Mean-Field Approximations
Under the FEP formulation of a mortal computer — which evinces operational closure by virtue of its Markov
blanket — we saw that there was a separation of time scales, i.e., inference, learning, and selection, inherent in its
‘dynamics on structure’. Specifically, a mortal computer can be distilled into the following relationships: 1) state
inference is just optimizing some belief structures about hidden states while, 2) parameter learning is just optimizing
some belief structures about hidden parameters while, 3) model selection is just selecting the right knowledge of
structure; in other words, optimizing beliefs about the functional form of a generative model. Nevertheless, despite
being observed/occurring within their own respective time-scales, relational dependencies exist between these
processes as soon as one considers the optimization perspective on minimizing VFE.
Specifically, the mortal computer cannot perform inference without the right parameters µ and it cannot learn its
parameters unless it leverages the right inference (to find values for its internal states z(t)). Furthermore, the system
cannot learn the right parameters µ unless it employs the correct structure 𝒬 for the underlying generative model.
Conversely, this system cannot select the right generative model structure unless it learns the right parameters. This
strong circular causality (illustrated in Figure 6), which is essential in the context of adaptation to a constantly
evolving niche, represents the core ‘intertwinement’ inherent to MILS. There is a straightforward and principled
reason for this intertwinement, which follows from a ubiquitous aspect of all measurement and modelling; namely,
a mean field approximation.
Applying the FEP to a mortal computer means that it is performing Bayesian inference that is physically realized.
Given that an entity cannot physically realize exact Bayesian inference, it must resort to approximation (hence the
use of a variational density in Equation 2). Variational free energy inherits the term ‘variational’ from the calculus
of variations [151] applied to a mean-field approximation, i.e., a factorization of a probability density into
conditionally independent factors [357, 362, 269]. This means that the (structure of a) mortal computer can be
described in terms of mean field approximations. One might then ask: what is the typical first choice for a mean-
field approximation? The answer is a mean-field approximation applied to states, parameters, and structure, which
allows us to computationally separate states from parameters — and parameters from structure.18 This means that
the distinction between inference and learning rests upon a mean-field approximation and thus a conditional
independence between states and parameters (and structure). We see this manifested in neuroanatomy, for
example, as short-term synaptic activity versus long-term plasticity, providing neuronal networks with the ability to
conduct fast inference when processing stimuli, while storing information into synaptic (associative) memory. The
same conditional independence is introduced through a mean-field approximation applied to the relationship
between parameters and the structure of a generative model. In the brain, a good example of this is in the way it
represents the ‘what’-‘where’-‘when’ distinction when processing sensory stimuli. The physical separation of dorsal
and ventral streams is often viewed as encoding ‘where’ and ‘what’ elements of visually perceived objects [336,
18 Although, in some applications of classical Kalman filters [190], one could instead treat parameters as very slowly varying
states – the state space is augmented with some slowly-varying variables that ‘stand in’ for the parameters and then the
Kalman filter is just run to, in effect, ‘learn’ the underlying state transition matrix.
19
Preprint
Figure 7: The backbone of mortal computation – mortal inference-learning-and-selection, influenced by its manifesting
substrate and niche and expressly realized under particular mean-field assumptions.
89]. Knowing ‘what’ something is does not tell one ‘where’ something is (and vice versa). The ensuing conditional
independence is embodied in a morphological separation between the ventral and dorsal streams. The same
separation applies to ‘what’ and ‘when’ [89, 139] given that knowing ‘what’ something is does not tell one ‘when’
it was ‘there’. Ultimately, these mean-field approximations reduce complexity; thereby minimizing statistical,
algorithmic, and thermodynamic costs [357]; in other words, optimizing the efficiency of the mortal computer’s
message-passing scheme.19
The above examples imply that, in biology, it is acceptable, as well as efficient, to work under such mean-field
approximations. This equally applies to mortal computers, given that they share the same goal of attaining some
open (nonequilibrium) steady-state exchange with the world. However, the premise behind using variational
calculus to leverage these mean-field approximations is that the system will work to ‘repair’ the falsehood induced
by such approximations, i.e., it must compensate for the statistical independence assumptions between its states
and parameters, and parameters and structure. This requires mechanisms to pass signals between the different
levels, motivating a message-passing scheme that links time scales. For example, in neuronal networks, experience
encoded in activity-dependent plasticity links inference to learning. A nonequilibrium steady-state entails a (VFE)
gradient flow at the time scales of inference, learning, as well as the selection of structures, meaning that systems,
such as mortal computers, must embody a form of activity-dependent adaptation, or, in other words, they operate
as dynamics on structures with dynamics [11].
A consequence of this type of dependent adaptation is that morphology, or structural instantiation, becomes
existentially important to the mortal computer, since it defines the sparsity of message-passing (of the learning and
inference processes) that can occur across the system’s elements. Structure becomes a core computational
resource to be employed to ensure a mortal computer’s continued survival and entails a search for mechanisms
that do the right kind of pruning/growing to facilitate autopoiesis, e.g., choosing the right synaptic connections in
a neuronal cell network in order to obtain the right graph structure.20 In biological systems, this morphological self-
organization is concerned with isolation and shielding: enzymes and catalysts, gap junctions and other controllable
bio-mechanisms set up signaling pathways and boundaries [233, 361]. And this occurs at multiple scales, ranging
from subcellular organelles (which partition biophysical, chemical reactions) to organ compartment boundaries to
animal group behavior [307, 98, 92]. In effect, the base structural elements of a mortal computer, much as cells in
multicellular structures, need to occupy their own place in a distributed morphology. This amounts to autopoietic
19 Even in machine intelligence, such mean-field approximations apply – in DNN-based models, there is a distinct conceptual
separation between the values of the synaptic parameter matrices and the number of levels/layers in a deep variational
autoencoder [197] or the number of attention heads within a transformer block [343].
20 A possible implementation of the system’s morphogenesis could involve starting at a particular ‘seed’ (spatial)
arrangement of parameters and incrementally, temporally switch things on or off, using mechanisms such as the gating
variables, which could be read as a form of precision weighting [134], often employed in cognitive control architectures
[258], or ‘structure learning variables’, that will be required to minimize their own variational free energy functionals.
20
Preprint
self-assembly where each element, equipped with its own boundary, detects local patterning signals as predicted
by its own generative model [141] and thereby minimizes its VFE, thus inferring its correct location and function
within the overall ensemble [141, 268].
The relationship between a system’s morphology, its learning, and its inference underwrites a mortal computer’s
physically-realizable Bayesian inference, which is the engine behind its existence. According to MILS, through the
FEP, morphology, learning, and inference mechanisms are all subject to the same essential mandates, each
responsible for minimizing the VFE bound associated with it. As a result of Equation 2, and in accordance with the
good regulator theorem, the mortal computer’s morphology will need to accurately describe its environment, while
also being as simple as possible [135, 136]. Finally, as a consequence of its morphology — and its coupling to the
niche across its Markov blanket — the details of a mortal computer and its MILS will be reflected in the
circumstances that it is instantiated under and further mediated by them. See Figure 7 for a visual depiction of the
relational dependency structure that underpins a mortal computer.
5 The Mortal Computation Thesis
Our framing of intelligence through mortal computation is that an agent’s behavioral repertoire stems from a primal
impetus to preserve its identity, to remain in a non-equilibrium steady state of stability in the face of a changing
environment21 . Most of what such an agent does is in service of its basic “needs”, satisfying its lowest-level
requirements. Three different perspectives in Section 3, the biophysical, the cybernetical, and the philosophical-
cognitive, were developed to offer implementational, analytical, and theoretical lenses through which to view
mortal computing. These perspectives served as the foundation for, in Section 4, a formalization of a morphic and
mortal form of computing, through the free energy principle and attending Markov blanket construction, to enable
mortal learning-inference-and-selection (MILS). With the context provided by these sections in place, we now turn
a definition of a mortal computer (MC) that offers an umbrella concept for implementations of mortal computation
and biomimetic intelligence.
Definition (Informal). a computer is mortal, if and only if:
1. Its morphology is specified in terms of a Markov blanket (i.e., a boundary comprising sensory and active
states) and its internal structure (i.e., a generative model that entails relationships between the Markov
blanket and its niche); i.e., the system is strictly morphic (not amorphic).22
2. It specifies a set of primary imperatives (i.e., characteristic states) that underwrite its persistence, and
which lead to resource-oriented action (this includes designation of ‘homeostatic’ states, e.g., fatigue,
overheating, et cetera).
3. It instantiates primary imperatives (i.e., precise priors over essential variables) that can be read as a
generalized homeostasis (e.g., ‘artificial metabolic pathways’).
4. It implements mortal inference-learning-and-selection (MILS), with each of the requisite processes
specified by a free energy functional of a generative model.
5. The computational processes (software) and the execution substrate (hardware) are co-designed, such that
the message passing, belief updating, and generative model — underwriting MILS — can be physically
realized.
Under this definition, an instance of software has no meaning without the hardware that instantiates it; it is strictly
morphic as per (Definition, property 1). The calculations carried out by a MC are grounded by morphological and
thermodynamic constraints that rest on their structural realization. At its lowest level, the MC, as a consequence
of its MILS (Definition, property 4) and generalized homeostatic control (Definition, property 3), will exhibit
thermodynamic efficiency, sustained through material/energy pathways, as provided by its niche. While MC sub-
systems might not be directly influenced by global morphology, each would sense local fluctuations in its
substructure and be capable of self-repair. Under the above definition, such a system would be enactive: an MC,
through MILS, entails morphogenetic processes that underwrite its physical structure, encoding environmental
information, given the first condition that its niche must be specified (via a generative model), thus pairing the body
with an environment (Definition, property 4 and property 1). Due to property 5, which goes hand-in-hand with
21 Strictly speaking, the FEP inverts this argument and states that if something exists, in the sense of possessing a Markov
blanket over macroscopic time, then it acquires a teleological description in terms of self-evidencing; namely, self-organising
to its characteristic states.
22 It is clear from this that the design and specification of the system’s computation strongly depends on the properties of
the nature or “biology” of the hardware structures that will implement it.
21
Preprint
property 1, it follows that the MC’s inference and learning processes are affected by — and are inextricably bound
to — its morphological state and evolution. On one end of the causal chain (in terms of Figure 6), a hardware-
software feedback loop must exist, given that the substrate dictates the set of morphogenetic functions that a MC
can take. On the other end of the chain, the inference dynamics themselves vicariously inform the direction that
the MC’s morphogenesis will take when selecting possible structures.
Given the above, we can now organize mortal computation into three broad classes. Namely:
1. Homeostatic MC:23 such a system satisfies properties 1-5 of the definition, i.e., it accounts for homeostasis over
essential variables;
2. Allostatic MC: such a system evinces a homeorhesis that is contextualized by allostasis;
3. Autopoietic MC: this class evinces homeostasis and allostasis but features an autopoietic aspect; namely, self-repair
and self-replication.
An autopoietic MC could serve as an ideal candidate for a complex adaptive system that instantiates a form of AGI.
Such a system would be far from trivial to construct, as it would require allostatic processes — that build on top of
reactive homeostatic functions — before higher-level cognitive processes could be implemented or emerge. A
complementary direction for achieving this goal, as afforded by theoretical frameworks for assembling modules of
a deep (i.e., hierarchical) allostatic MC, could draw inspiration from cognitive architectures [207, 321, 258].
An allostatic MC could be built with homeostatic MCs (echoing the spirit of Figure 3). Notably, to craft this kind of
MC, the Markov blanket framing of Section 4 could be deployed in a recursive, hierarchical manner. As a result of
their formulation, Markov blankets allow the deployment of blankets of ever-increasing scale. This facilitates the
construction of organs from cells/tissues, bodies/individuals from organs, etc., where the statistical
form/partitioning applies from the macroscopic down to the microscopic level. In this setup, a Markov blanket —
and its internal states — at the macro-level, are constituted by the blanket states of smaller entities at microscopic
scales. This hierarchical construction would then result in the dynamics of the states at one scale exerting
downward casual mediation/constraint on Markov blankets in the level below [198], thus ensuring that the system
minimizes its joint VFE, globally. In addition, one could appeal to principles in complexity theory [178, 290] and
synergetics [161] to develop schemes for self-assembly, designing a process where Markov blankets are involved in
re-configuring specific dependencies between internal, external, active, and sensory states. This self-assembling
could be cast over time-scales, where slow ensemble dynamics arise from micro-scale dynamics that unfold over
fast(er) time-scales: yielding an orderly coordination of the lower-level Markov blankets [290]. This implies that an
autopoietic MC must comprise multiple Markov blankets and its microdynamics would be constrained by its
macrodynamics. In Table 1, we review several extant mortal computers, such as the homeostat [24, 327, 74, 21,
279, 283], the electrochemical thread [271, 39, 40, 54], xenobots [30, 220, 57, 87, 56], fungal computing [245, 19,
6, 7, 16, 8], and cell preparations such as organoids [163, 314, 313] (with further details in the supplement).
5.2 Implications for Biomimetic Intelligence
Directions for Inquiry. Our theoretical framing generates several key questions that future work in biomimetic
intelligence could address through the lens of the mortal computational thesis. Among the most important will be:
What can real-world, biological systems and their niches tell us about mortal computers? How might their internal
functioning (e.g., design of their internal states and requisite Markov blankets) inform the design of MC systems?
Biophysical entities, e.g., xenobots [30, 220] and organoid micro-physiological systems [163, 314], offer compelling
examples of systems capable of self-organization and self-replication, as well as different levels of basal cognition
and collective behavior. Beyond studying these entities for patterns and mechanisms that could inform the design
of in silico analogues, the definition of a mortal computer does not commit to implementation in any particular
substrate/niche. Therefore, xenobots and organoids serve as plausible candidates for MC development. However,
at the time of writing, such biophysical systems are neither readily available nor easily accessible to those that work
in the sciences of the artificial, as opposed to those that work in the biological domains. This motivates work
towards creating biophysical or chimeric mortal computing systems as well as exchange of insights from
xenobot/organoid research to in silico system/neuromorphic engineering. In the supplement, we examine and
study neuromorphic computing chips and neuromimetic schemes, e.g., predictive coding and forward-only learning
[31, 254, 247], in the context of mortal computation as well as a re-framing of the machine intelligence evaluation
paradigm, introducing a problem unique to mortal computation known as the body-niche problem.
23 In the supplement, we sketch a homeostatic MC based on predictive coding, inspired by chemotaxis models [111].
22
Preprint
Homeostat Ashby’s homeostat [24, 327, 74, 21], and its subsequent updates [327], is a powerful example of a real-world
adaptive regulator implemented in a non-biological medium [74, 279]. It is one of the first real-world examples
of a mortal computer (MC) that implements an internal model of control that exhibits requisite variety,
ultrastability, as well as self-regulation. The homeostat is able to maintain stability in the face of environmental
perturbations and its imperative was to keep the value of a control variable near a target value within some
specified range. The system would evaluate whether a particular set of values, i.e., a configuration (of stepper
switch combinations), made it an effective controller of its environment and, if the controlled variables were
not within desired ranges, the homeostat would select another configuration. Notably, the homeostat’s search
through configurations only took as long as the time needed for mechanical switching and the
electromechanical circuit to reach its steady state, thus providing an example of computing where the only
costs are those of the system’s thermodynamics (Section 2). In addition, the homeostat could adapt to physical
damage [283] and originally learned via a process of trial-and-error [24, 21] (making it a homeostatic MC)
though later it was extended to incorporate memory-based adaptation [73] (making this version an allostatic
MC, i.e., an “allostat”).
Electrochemical The electrochemical thread (or “ear”) of [271, 39, 40] — also referred to as a “maverick machine” [54] — is a
Thread motivating example of what an autopoietic MC might look like. The system was made up of a few platinum
electrodes inserted into a dish that were connected to an electrical source; in this setup, metallic iron threads
would form between electrodes through which current would flow. These threads would exhibit low resistance
relative to the solution and current would flow through them upon repeated electrical activation. If no current
passed through a thread, the thread would dissolve back into its acidic solution. Over time, the threads would
self-assemble into larger stable, cooperative structures by absorbing neighboring unstable sub-structures.
Notably, the longer that a thread network stably grew, the slower it would break down and the faster it would
return to its original structure upon a reset of the current; this demonstrated its acquisition of ultrastability.
Given positive reinforcement, the electrochemical thread would respond by growing sensor organs of its own
accord and incorporate them into its morphology [271], thus making it capable of creating filters conducive to
its survival.
Xenobots The xenobot system [30, 220, 57, 87, 56] is, in effect, a swarm of biological robotic agents that self-organizes in
response to the structure of its niche. An individual xenobot is a small, self-healing biological machine based on
frog cells, and when grouped into a collective, is capable of moving a payload and engaging in cooperative
behavior. The more recent form of xenobots has been shown to capable of self-assembling into “spheroids”
[56, 57] and individual entities within it demonstrate the ability to spontaneously specialize into new roles,
resulting in new bodily behavior and designs without waiting for a slow evolutionary process to select such
useful features. We remark that a xenobot system offers a concrete instance of the kind of morphogenesis that
an autopoietic MC should exhibit. Specifically, a single xenobot exhibits the ability to grow, mature, self-heal,
and, more importantly, contains a metabolism; it is able to absorb and break down proteins and chemicals,
which makes it capable of surviving for months (in an environment containing nutrients). Xenobots not only
provide insights into how basal cognition emerges in multicellular organisms but also exemplifies
implementation of mortal computation in terms of a biological substrate; the “hardware” includes the genome
and emergent cellular structures, while the “software” is the cellular communication that underwrites the
creation of the higher-level structures. With respect to our definition’s tenets, a xenobot system provides a
strong representation and specification of each and could serve as an inspiration for the design of in-silico MCs.
Organoids Recently, an in vitro preparation known as “intelligence-in-a-dish”, or organoid intelligence [163, 314, 313], has
been demonstrated to be capable of simple reinforcement learning in tasks such as playing an Atari video game
like Pong [314] and has been argued to play an invaluable role for understanding biological information
processing [138]. Concretely, organoids are 3D tissue cultures that are derived from stem cells and are capable
of receiving genetic level instructions to drive self-organization as well as growth into complex morphologies,
e.g., tissues and minimal organs. The study of “sentient organoids” [138] could not only result in new energy-
efficient computational models of neural dynamics and synaptic plasticity but their natural growth and decay
could foster new ideas for emulating the structural evolutionary component of an MC’s MILS, which drives its
ability to consolidate knowledge at the time-scales of learning and inference [236]. Given that they embody the
five central tenets of our definition of mortal computation, cell cultures and organoids stand to offer a
promising guide for informing the advances to be made in the design of autopoietic MCs, possibly those that
will be developed at the intersection of neuromorphic-based cognition and the bio-engineering of neuronal
micro-physiological systems.
Fungal Systems Funguses and molds have been shown to work as computing devices [245, 19, 6, 7, 16, 8] by reprogramming
their internal geometrical calculations (such as those performed by the pink oyster mushroom) and leveraging
the resultant electrical activity to drive circuits. In terms of mortal computation, mold-based computational
systems have been shown to demonstrate abilities related to resilience, development of intricate structures for
information transmission, self-maintenance, and growth [7]. These abilities that could serve as possible
ingredients in crafting a soft autopoietic MC.
Table 1: Extant mortal computers – we highlight and review five real-world examples of mortal computation systems.
Implications for AI/AGI. There are misconceptions related to the current state of AI [3, 1, 4, 2], largely driven by
our fascination with intelligence and compounded by our tendency to anthropomorphize. This is exemplified by
our captivation with large language models that are intelligent in some sense but are not intelligent in the way that
organisms, such as humans, are [2, 81]. The future of AI/AGI, in accordance with mortal computation, lies in the
pursuit of other definitions and formulations of intelligence, primarily grounded in biomimetics and bionics. This
review’s aim is to illuminate a pathway that builds on many years of converging thought in biophysics, biology,
cybernetics, cognitive science, and naturalist philosophy. In short, mortal computation is one possible key to AGI.
23
Preprint
This review advocates for a different perspective on AI; current forms of AI generally treat it as a tool in support of
human endeavors. Efforts in this direction eschew or dismiss other perspectives and ideas that could lead to
breakthroughs in the design of general and multi-purpose intelligent systems. If we look at humans, animals, and
organisms, at large, for examples of natural intelligence, we observe entities capable of performing and learning
many different kinds of tasks and, if something goes wrong, such entities die. It is this very mortality that drives the
mortal computation thesis and motivates a switch from a needs-oriented, ‘tool-centric’ view of AI (which has led
to the development of powerful yet narrow AI [3] systems) towards one that grounds intelligent, adaptive behavior
in the roots of life itself. The pursuit of life/survival and its relationship to mind can teach us about intelligence that
is embodied, enactive, and capable of general functionality [132, 277]. The mortal computation thesis offers a
possible catalyst for the next stage of AI research: Moore’s law does not apply beyond a certain point and other
computing paradigms, such as quantum computing [252], might provide a faster way of conducting the kinds of
calculations we do today. However, this still keeps us within the tradition of immortal computing. One might view
the future as residing in not viewing intelligence as a difference engine but instead as an artificial form of sentience:
one that is capable of self-healing and self-repairing with autonomy — its existential imperative being to persist in
(generalized) synchrony with its world.
6 Conclusion
The pathway forward for biomimetic and bionic intelligence offered by mortal computation, as presented in this
review, synthesizes the intellectual pursuits of countless theoreticians, scientists, and engineers across the
centuries. Its essence — lying at the intersection of cybernetical, biophysical, and philosophical constructs — is a
groundwork for a road towards sentient behavior in that of the artificial. The ethical implications of such an artifact
which, according to some perspectives, would endow it with a moral status [296, 159], are vast. If the enterprise of
mortal computation is to succeed, these issues will need to be considered; ranging from the nature of the
relationship of mortal computers with living entities to their rights [199, 83, 159]. If the premise of a mortal
computer is correct, then the right levels of self-organizing, self-regulating processes, interacting with, and
instantiated by, elements of a physical morphology capable of regeneration will engender increasing degrees of
behavior ranging from basal cognition to planning and imagination. This, in principle, would possibly answer, in the
affirmative, the question whether an artifact — given that it effectively is a life form — can reason, suffer, or
communicate. Much as with other forms of life, such as animals, this will require consideration of the rights of in-
silico mortal bionic entities [46], as the lines between the artificial and the natural become blurred. The benefits of
such a sentient artifact, grounded in its physical manifestation and self-caused impetus for continuance, are many-
fold; such an entity, as a consequence of its bionic drives and goals will exhibit a curiosity about the environment in
which it exists [143, 302]. It will have the capacity to ‘care’ for/about others, possibly facilitating emergent empathy,
social intelligence, and communicative ability. Unlike modern-day forms of computational intelligence, e.g., large
neural transformer generative systems [64, 323, 77, 230, 333], that do not have an experience of body, a bionic
entity might very well even be able to “...break its own rules”.24
Despite these grand implications, this review is intended to highlight provisional steps towards ‘mortal computing’.
Many core ideas behind mortal computation have emerged over many decades. Mortal computing, as we have
argued, may play an important role in the long-term future of research in AGI; further catalyzed by the advances in
the manufacture and study of biological computers. Applications of AGI under mortal computing are manifold;
ranging from edge-based computing and robotics to green AI to systems that can be deployed in the service of
sustainability at a number of levels.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Christopher Buckley for useful comments/pointers during the early presentations of this work as well
as the Theoretical Neurobiology Group (TNB) for stimulating discussions, questions, and comments that shaped the thinking
and motivations underlying this manuscript. We also would like to thank Alexander Ororbia (Sr.) for reviewing and providing
edits to the early drafts of this article. This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Wellcome Trust [203147/Z/16/Z].
We further acknowledge the support of the Cisco Research Gift Award #26224. For the purpose of Open Access, the authors
have applied a CC BY public copyright license to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
24 Jasia Reichard, International Conference on Robotics and Automation 2023 keynote, “In Praise of Strangeness”.
24
Preprint
References
[1] A.I. is not what you think. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/15/technology/artificial-intelligence. html. Accessed:
2023-10-10.
[2] Debunking ai myths: The truth behind 5 common misconceptions. https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/
2023/07/05/debunking-ai-myths-the-truth-behind-5-common-misconceptions/?sh=2445419b3608. Accessed: 2023-10-
10.
[3] How much longer before our first ai catastrophe? https://gizmodo.com/ how-much-longer-before-our-first-ai-
catastrophe-464043243. Accessed: 2023-10-10.
[4] Human beings are soon going to be eclipsed. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/13/opinion/ ai-chatgpt-consciousness-
hofstadter.html. Accessed: 2023-10-10.
[5] ADAM, H., AND GALINSKY, A. D. Enclothed cognition. Journal of experimental social psychology 48, 4 (2012), 918–925.
[6] ADAMATZKY, A. Slime mold solves maze in one pass, assisted by gradient of chemo-attractants. IEEE transactions on
nanobioscience 11, 2 (2012), 131–134.
[7] ADAMATZKY, A. Towards fungal computer. Interface focus 8, 6 (2018), 20180029.
[8] ADAMATZKY, A., AYRES, P., BEASLEY, A. E., CHIOLERIO, A., DEHSHIBI, M. M., GANDIA, A., ALBERGATI, E., MAYNE, R., NIKOLAIDOU, A.,
ROBERTS, N., ET AL. Fungal electronics. Biosystems 212 (2022), 104588.
[9] ADAMS, F. Embodied cognition. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 9 (2010), 619–628.
[10] ADLER, J. Chemoreceptors in bacteria: Studies of chemotaxis reveal systems that detect attractants independently of their
metabolism. Science 166, 3913 (1969), 1588–1597.
[11] AERTSEN, A., GERSTEIN, G., HABIB, M., AND PALM, G. Dynamics of neuronal firing correlation: modulation of" effective
connectivity". Journal of neurophysiology 61, 5 (1989), 900–917.
[12] ALEXANDRE, G. Coupling metabolism and chemotaxis-dependent behaviours by energy taxis receptors. Microbiology 156,
8 (2010), 2283–2293.
[13] ALEXANDRE, G., GREER, S. E., AND ZHULIN, I. B. Energy taxis is the dominant behavior in azospirillum brasilense. Journal of
Bacteriology 182, 21 (2000), 6042–6048.
[14] ALHAMBRA, Á. M., MASANES, L., OPPENHEIM, J., AND PERRY, C. Fluctuating work: From quantum thermodynamical identities to
a second law equality. Physical Review X 6, 4 (2016), 041017.
[15] ALLEN, M., AND FRISTON, K. J. From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a computational framework for the embodied mind.
Synthese 195, 6 (2018), 2459–2482.
[16] ALNAHWI, F. M., AL-YASIR, Y. I., SATTAR, D., ALI, R. S., SEE, C. H., AND ABD-ALHAMEED, R. A. A new optimization algorithm based
on the fungi kingdom expansion behavior for antenna applications. Electronics 10, 17 (2021), 2057.
[17] AMODEI, D., AND HERNANDEZ, D. AI and compute. https://openai.com/blog/ai-and-compute/, May 2018.
[18] ANDERSON, M. L. Embodied cognition: A field guide. Artificial intelligence 149, 1 (2003), 91–130.
[19] AONO, M., AND GUNJI, Y.-P. Beyond input-output computings: Error-driven emergence with parallel non-distributed slime
mold computer. BioSystems 71, 3 (2003), 257–287.
[20] AURELL, E., GAWEDZKI, K., MEJIA-MONSTERIO, MOHAYAEE, R., AND MURATORE-GINANNESCHI, P., Y. Refined second law of thermodynamics
for fast random processes. Journal of statistical physics 147, (2012), 487-505.
[21] ASHBY, W. Design for a brain: The origin of adaptive behaviour. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[22] ASHBY, W. R. Principles of the self-organizing dynamic system. The Journal of general psychology 37, 2 (1947), 125–128.
[23] ASHBY, W. R. An introduction to cybernetics. London: Chapman & Hall Ltd., 1956.
[24] ASHBY, W. R. The homeostat. In Design for a Brain: The origin of adaptive behaviour. Springer, 1960, pp. 100–121.
[25] ASHBY, W. R. Principles of the self-organizing system. Modern systems research for the behavioral scientist 108 (1968).
[26] ASHBY, W. R. The brain of yesterday and today. Mechanisms of Intellicience, Roger Conant (ed), Intersystems Publications,
Seaside (1981), 397–403.
[27] ASHBY, W. R. Variety, constraint, and the law of requisite variety. In Systems Research for Behavioral Sciencesystems
Research. Routledge, 2017, pp. 129–136.
[28] BAK, P., TANG, C., AND WIESENFELD, K. Self-organized criticality. Physical review A 38, 1 (1988), 364.
25
Preprint
[29] BAKER, G., AND MORRIS, K. Descartes’ dualism. Routledge, 2005.
[30] BALL, P. Living robots. Nature materials 19, 3 (2020), 265–265.
[31] BALLARD, D. H., RAO, R. P. N., AND ZHANG, Z. A single-spike model of predictive coding. Neurocomputing 32 (2000), 17–23.
[32] BALTIERI, M., AND BUCKLEY, C. L. An active inference implementation of phototaxis. In Artificial Life Conference Proceedings
(2017), MIT Press One Rogers Street, Cambridge, MA 02142-1209, USA journals-info ..., pp. 36–43.
[33] BARAK, R., AND EISENBACH, M. Chemotactic-like response of escherichia coli cells lacking the known chemotaxis machinery
but containing overexpressed chey. Molecular Microbiology 31, 4 (1999), 1125–1137.
[34] BARRETT, L. F. Seven and a half lessons about the brain. Houghton Mifflin, 2020.
[35] BATESON, G. Steps to an ecology of mind: Collected essays in anthropology, psychiatry, evolution, and epistemology.
University of Chicago press, 2000.
[36] BAUER, E. S. Theoretical Biology. Akademiai Kiado, 1935.
[37] BEARD, D. Philosophy in the flesh: the embodied mind and its challenge to western thought. Argumentation and Advocacy
38, 1 (2001), 59.
[38] BEER, R. D. Dynamical systems and embedded cognition. The Cambridge handbook of artificial intelligence 28 (2014).
[39] BEER, S. The viable system model: Its provenance, development, methodology and pathology. Journal of the operational
research society 35, 1 (1984), 7–25.
[40] BEER, S. A progress note on research into a cybernetic analogue of fabric. How Many Grapes Went into the Wine: Stafford
Beer on the Art and Science of Holistic Management (1994), 29.
[41] BENGIO, E., BACON, P.-L., PINEAU, J., AND PRECUP, D. Conditional computation in neural networks for faster models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.06297 (2015).
[42] BENGIO, Y., LÉONARD, N., AND COURVILLE, A. Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional
computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 (2013).
[43] BENGIO, Y., MESNARD, T., FISCHER, A., ZHANG, S., AND WU, Y. Stdp-compatible approximation of backpropagation in an energy-
based model. Neural computation 29, 3 (2017), 555–577.
[44] BENNETT, C. H. The thermodynamics of computation—a review. International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21 (1982),
905–940.
[45] BENNETT, C. H. Notes on landauer’s principle, reversible computation, and maxwell’s demon. Studies In History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies In History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34, 3 (2003), 501–510.
[46] BENTHAM, J. The collected works of Jeremy Bentham: An introduction to the principles of morals and legislation. Clarendon
Press, 1996.
[47] BERGSTRA, J., AND BENGIO, Y. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of machine learning research 13, 2
(2012).
[48] BERLEKAMP, E., CONWAY, J., AND GUY, R. Winning ways, for your mathematical plays. Academic Press 2, 1 (1974).
[49] BERTALANFFY, L. V. General system theory: Foundations, development, applications. G. Braziller, 1968.
[50] BETTS, J. Anatomy and Physiology. Open Textbook Library. OpenStax College, Rice University, 2013.
[51] BI, G.-Q., AND POO, M.-M. Synaptic modifications in cultured hippocampal neurons: dependence on spike timing, synaptic
strength, and postsynaptic cell type. Journal of neuroscience 18, 24 (1998), 10464–10472.
[52] BI, G.-Q., AND POO, M.-M. Synaptic modification by correlated activity: Hebb’s postulate revisited. Annual review of
neuroscience 24, 1 (2001), 139–166.
[53] BILLMAN, G. E. Homeostasis: the underappreciated and far too often ignored central organizing principle of physiology.
Frontiers in physiology (2020), 200.
[54] BIRD, J., AND DI PAOLO, E. Gordon pask and his maverick machines. The mechanical mind in history (2008), 185–211.
[55] BITBOL, M., AND LUISI, P. L. Autopoiesis with or without cognition: defining life at its edge. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface 1, 1 (2004), 99–107.
[56] BLACKISTON, D., KRIEGMAN, S., BONGARD, J., AND LEVIN, M. Biological robots: Perspectives on an emerging interdisciplinary field.
Soft Robotics (2023).
[57] BLACKISTON, D., LEDERER, E., KRIEGMAN, S., GARNIER, S., BONGARD, J., AND LEVIN, M. A cellular platform for the development of
synthetic living machines. Science Robotics 6, 52 (2021), eabf1571.
26
Preprint
[58] BLACKISTON, D. J., SILVA CASEY, E., AND WEISS, M. R. Retention of memory through metamorphosis: can a moth remember
what it learned as a caterpillar? PloS one 3, 3 (2008), e1736.
[59] BODEN, M. A. Is metabolism necessary? The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 50, 2 (1999), 231–248.
[60] BODEN, M. A. Autopoiesis and life. Cognitive Science Quarterly 1, 1 (2000), 115–143.
[61] BRAND, M. D. Regulation analysis of energy metabolism. Journal of Experimental Biology 200, 2 (1997), 193–202.
[62] BREVINI, B. Black boxes, not green: Mythologizing artificial intelligence and omitting the environment. Big Data & Society
7, 2 (2020), 2053951720935141.
[63] BROOKS, R. A. Cambrian intelligence: The early history of the new AI. MIT press, 1999.
[64] BROWN, T. B., MANN, B., RYDER, N., SUBBIAH, M., KAPLAN, J., DHARIWAL, P., NEELAKANTAN, A., SHYAM, P., SASTRY, G., ASKELL, A., ET AL.
Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2020).
[65] BURDAKOV, D. Reactive and predictive homeostasis: roles of orexin/hypocretin neurons. Neuropharmacology 154 (2019),
61–67.
[66] BUTZ, M., WÖRGÖTTER, F., AND VAN OOYEN, A. Activity-dependent structural plasticity. Brain research reviews 60, 2 (2009),
287–305.
[67] CAMMERER, S., EBADA, M., ELKELESH, A., AND TEN BRINK, S. Sparse graphs for belief propagation decoding of polar codes. In
2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) (2018), IEEE, pp. 1465–1469.
[68] CAMPBELL, D. T. Blind variation and selective retentions in creative thought as in other knowledge processes. Psychological
review 67, 6 (1960), 380.
[69] CAMPBELL, D. T. Unjustified variation and selective retention in scientific discovery. Studies in the philosophy of biology:
Reduction and related problems (1974), 139–161.
[70] CAMPBELL, D. T. ‘Downward causation’in hierarchically organised biological systems. Studies in the philosophy of biology:
Reduction and related problems (1974), 179–186.
[71] CANNON, W. B. Physiological regulation of normal states: some tentative postulates concerning biological homeostatics.
Ses Amis, ses Colleges, ses Eleves (1926).
[72] CANNON, W. B. The wisdom of the body. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences 184, 6 (1932), 864.
[73] CAPEHART, B. L., AND TERRY, R. A. Digital simulation of the homeostat modified to show memory and learning. IEEE
Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics 4, 2 (1968), 188–190.
[74] CARIANI, P. A. The homeostat as embodiment of adaptive control. international Journal of General systems 38, 2 (2009),
139–154.
[75] CARULLI, D., FOSCARIN, S., AND ROSSI, F. Activity-dependent plasticity and gene expression modifications in the adult cns.
Frontiers in molecular neuroscience 4 (2011), 50.
[76] CAULFIELD, H. J., KINSER, J., AND ROGERS, S. K. Optical neural networks. Proceedings of the IEEE 77, 10 (1989), 1573–1583.
[77] CHEN, M., TWOREK, J., JUN, H., YUAN, Q., PINTO, H. P. D. O., KAPLAN, J., EDWARDS, H., BURDA, Y., JOSEPH, N., BROCKMAN, G., ET AL.
Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[78] CHEPURI, S. P., LIU, S., LEUS, G., AND HERO, A. O. Learning sparse graphs under smoothness prior. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (2017), IEEE, pp. 6508–6512.
[79] CHIEL, H. J., AND BEER, R. D. The brain has a body: adaptive behavior emerges from interactions of nervous system, body
and environment. Trends in neurosciences 20, 12 (1997), 553–557.
[80] CHO, K., AND BENGIO, Y. Exponentially increasing the capacity-to-computation ratio for conditional computation in deep
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.7362 (2014).
[81] CHOMSKY, N., ROBERTS, I., AND WATUMULL, J. Noam chomsky: The false promise of chatgpt. The New York Times 8 (2023).
[82] CLARK, A. Being there: Putting brain, body, and world together again. MIT press, 1998.
[83] CLARK, A. A theory of sentience. Clarendon press, 2000.
[84] CLARK, A. Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. OUP USA, 2008.
[85] CLARK, A. How to knit your own markov blanket: Resisting the second law with metamorphic minds. In Philosophy and
Predictive Processing. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group., 2017, p. 3.
[86] CLARK, A., AND CHALMERS, D. The extended mind. analysis 58, 1 (1998), 7–19.
27
Preprint
[87] CLAWSON, W. P., AND LEVIN, M. Endless forms most beautiful 2.0: teleonomy and the bioengineering of chimaeric and
synthetic organisms. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society (2022), blac073.
[88] CLAYTON, R. K. Studies in the phototaxis of Rhodospirillum rubrum. PhD thesis, California Institute of Technology, 1951.
[89] CLOUTMAN, L. L. Interaction between dorsal and ventral processing streams: where, when and how? Brain and language
127, 2 (2013), 251–263.
[90] COHEN, P. The regulation of protein function by multisite phosphorylation–a 25 year update. Trends in biochemical sciences
25, 12 (2000), 596–601.
[91] CONANT, R. C., AND ROSS ASHBY, W. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system. International journal
of systems science 1, 2 (1970), 89–97.
[92] COUZIN, I. D. Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends in cognitive sciences 13, 1 (2009), 36–43.
[93] COVI, E., DONATI, E., LIANG, X., KAPPEL, D., HEIDARI, H., PAYVAND, M., AND WANG, W. Adaptive extreme edge computing for
wearable devices. Frontiers in Neuroscience 15 (2021), 611300.
[94] CROMMELINCK, M., FELTZ, B., AND GOUJON, P. Self-organization and emergence in life sciences. Springer, 2006.
[95] DAVIES, M., SRINIVASA, N., LIN, T.-H., CHINYA, G., CAO, Y., CHODAY, S. H., DIMOU, G., JOSHI, P., IMAM, N., JAIN, S., ET AL. Loihi: A
neuromorphic manycore processor with on-chip learning. IEEE Micro 38, 1 (2018), 82–99.
[96] DAYAN, P., HINTON, G. E., NEAL, R. M., AND ZEMEL, R. S. The helmholtz machine. Neural computation 7, 5 (1995), 889–904.
[97] DE JESUS, P. Autopoietic enactivism, phenomenology and the deep continuity between life and mind. Phenomenology and
the Cognitive Sciences 15 (2016), 265–289.
[98] DEISBOECK, T. S., AND COUZIN, I. D. Collective behavior in cancer cell populations. Bioessays 31, 2 (2009), 190–197.
[99] DEMIREL, Y., AND SANDLER, S. I. Thermodynamics and bioenergetics. Biophysical Chemistry 97, 2-3 (2002), 87–111.
[100] DEMPSTER, A. P., LAIRD, N. M., AND RUBIN, D. B. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the em algorithm. Journal of
the royal statistical society: series B (methodological) 39, 1 (1977), 1–22.
[101] DESCARTES, R. Discourse on the method: And, meditations on first philosophy. Yale University Press, 1996.
[102] DEVLIN, J., CHANG, M.-W., LEE, K., AND TOUTANOVA, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[103] DI PAOLO, E. Extended life. Topoi 28 (2009), 9–21.
[104] DI PAOLO, E., ROHDE, M., AND DE JAEGHER, H. Horizons for the Enactive Mind: Values, Social Interaction, and Play. In Enaction:
Towards a New Paradigm for Cognitive Science. The MIT Press, 11 2010.
[105] DREXLER, E. Engines of creation: the coming era of nanotechnology. Anchor, 1987.
[106] DREYFUS, H. What computers can’t do. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 27, 2 (1976).
[107] DREYFUS, H. L. Alchemy and artificial intelligence, 1965.
[108] DUAN, J., YU, S., TAN, H. L., ZHU, H., AND TAN, C. A survey of embodied ai: From simulators to research tasks. IEEE Transactions
on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 6, 2 (2022), 230–244.
[109] DUVILLIER, J., KILLINGER, M., HEGGARTY, K., YAO, K., ET AL. All-optical implementation of a self-organizing map: a preliminary
approach. Applied optics 33, 2 (1994), 258–266.
[110] EERLAND, A., GUADALUPE, T. M., AND ZWAAN, R. A. Leaning to the left makes the eiffel tower seem smaller: posture-modulated
estimation. Psychological Science 22, 12 (2011), 1511–1514.
[111] EGBERT, M. D., BARANDIARAN, X. E., AND DI PAOLO, E. A. A minimal model of metabolism-based chemotaxis. PLoS
Computational Biology 6, 12 (2010), e1001004.
[112] EGBERT, M. D., BARANDIARAN, X. E., AND DI PAOLO, E. A. Behavioral metabolution: The adaptive and evolutionary potential of
metabolism-based chemotaxis. Artificial Life 18, 1 (2011), 1–25.
[113] ELSKEN, T., METZEN, J. H., AND HUTTER, F. Neural architecture search: A survey. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 20,
1 (2019), 1997–2017.
[114] EVANS, D. J. A non-equilibrium free energy theorem for deterministic systems. Molecular Physics 101, 10 (2003), 1551–
1554.
[115] FALOTICO, E., VANNUCCI, L., AMBROSANO, A., ALBANESE, U., ULBRICH, S., VASQUEZ TIECK, J. C., HINKEL, G., KAISER, J., PERIC, I., DENNINGER,
O., ET AL. Connecting artificial brains to robots in a comprehensive simulation framework: the neurorobotics platform.
Frontiers in neurorobotics 11 (2017), 2.
28
Preprint
[116] FARNSWORTH, K. D. Can a robot have free will? Entropy 19, 5 (2017), 237.
[117] FARNSWORTH, K. D. How organisms gained causal independence and how it might be quantified. Biology 7, 3 (2018), 38.
[118] FARNSWORTH, K. D. How biological codes break causal chains to enable autonomy for organisms. Biosystems (2023),
105013.
[119] FARNSWORTH, K. D., ALBANTAKIS, L., AND CARUSO, T. Unifying concepts of biological function from molecules to ecosystems.
Oikos 126, 10 (2017), 1367–1376.
[120] FARNSWORTH, K. D., NELSON, J., AND GERSHENSON, C. Living is information processing: from molecules to global systems. Acta
biotheoretica 61 (2013), 203–222.
[121] FIELDS, C., FRISTON, K., GLAZEBROOK, J. F., LEVIN, M., AND MARCIANÒ, A. The free energy principle induces neuromorphic
development. Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering 2, 4 (2022), 042002.
[122] FIELDS, C., AND GLAZEBROOK, J. F. Representing measurement as a thermodynamic symmetry breaking. Symmetry 12, 5
(2020), 810.
[123] FIELDS, C., GLAZEBROOK, J. F., AND LEVIN, M. Minimal physicalism as a scale-free substrate for cognition and consciousness.
Neuroscience of consciousness 2021, 2 (2021), niab013.
[124] FIELDS, C., AND LEVIN, M. Competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as an invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse
embodiments. Entropy 24, 6 (2022), 819.
[125] FINGARETTE, H. Death: philosophical soundings. Open Court, 2015.
[126] FLYNN, T. Existentialism. Sterling Publishing Company, Inc., 2009.
[127] FODOR, J. A. The modularity of mind. MIT press, 1983.
[128] FOGLIA, L., AND WILSON, R. A. Embodied cognition. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science 4, 3 (2013), 319–325.
[129] FOKIN, S. I. Paramecium genus: biodiversity, some morphological features and the key to the main morphospecies
discrimination. Protistology 6, 4 (2010), 227–235.
[130] FOSHIE, A. Z., PLANK, J. S., ROSE, G. S., AND SCHUMAN, C. D. Functional specification of the ravens neuroprocessor. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.15232 (2023).
[131] FRANCIS, B. A., AND WONHAM, W. M. The internal model principle of control theory. Automatica 12, 5 (1976), 457–465.
[132] FRANKLIN, S. Autonomous agents as embodied ai. Cybernetics & Systems 28, 6 (1997), 499–520.
[133] FRISTON, K. Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS computational biology 4, 11 (2008), e1000211.
[134] FRISTON, K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature reviews neuroscience 11, 2 (2010), 127–138.
[135] FRISTON, K. Embodied inference: Or i think therefore i am, if i am what i think. The implications of embodiment (Cognition
and Communication) (2011), 89–125.
[136] FRISTON, K. Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10, 86 (2013), 20130475.
[137] FRISTON, K. A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.10184 (2019).
[138] FRISTON, K. The sentient organoid? Frontiers in Science (2023), 0.
[139] FRISTON, K., AND BUZSÁKI, G. The functional anatomy of time: what and when in the brain. Trends in cognitive sciences 20, 7
(2016), 500–511.
[140] FRISTON, K., FITZGERALD, T., RIGOLI, F., SCHWARTENBECK, P., AND PEZZULO, G. Active inference: a process theory. Neural
computation 29, 1 (2017), 1–49.
[141] FRISTON, K., LEVIN, M., SENGUPTA, B., AND PEZZULO, G. Knowing one’s place: a free-energy approach to pattern regulation.
Journal of the Royal Society Interface 12, 105 (2015), 20141383.
[142] FRISTON, K., AND PENNY, W. Post hoc bayesian model selection. Neuroimage 56, 4 (2011), 2089–2099.
[143] FRISTON, K. J., LIN, M., FRITH, C. D., PEZZULO, G., HOBSON, J. A., AND ONDOBAKA, S. Active inference, curiosity and insight. Neural
computation 29, 10 (2017), 2633–2683.
[144] FROESE, T., AND ZIEMKE, T. Enactive artificial intelligence: Investigating the systemic organization of life and mind. Artificial
intelligence 173, 3-4 (2009), 466–500.
[145] GABORA, L., AND STEEL, M. Autocatalytic networks in cognition and the origin of culture. Journal of Theoretical Biology 431
(2017), 87–95.
29
Preprint
[146] GALLAGHER, S. Pragmatic interventions into enactive and extended conceptions of cognition. Philosophical Issues 24, 1
(2014), 110–126.
[147] GALLAGHER, S. Enactivist interventions: Rethinking the mind. Oxford University Press, 2017.
[148] GARDNER, M. The fantastic combinations of john conway’s new solitaire game ’life’. Scientific American 223 (1970), 20–
123.
[149] GASTEIGER, J., WEISSENBERGER, S., AND GÜNNEMANN, S. Diffusion improves graph learning. Advances in neural information
processing systems 32 (2019).
[150] GEIMAN, Q. M., AND RATCLIFFE, H. L. Morphology and life-cycle of an amoeba producing amoebiasis in reptiles1. Parasitology
28, 2 (1936), 208–228.
[151] GELFAND, I. M., SILVERMAN, R. A., ET AL. Calculus of variations. Courier Corporation, 2000.
[152] GERBER, U., HUEBNER, R., ROSSBERG, A., KRAWCZYK-BAERSCH, E., AND MERROUN, M. L. Metabolism-
dependent bioaccumulation of uranium by rhodosporidium toruloides isolated from the flooding water of a former
uranium mine. PLoS One 13, 8 (2018), e0201903.
[153] GERSTNER, W. Spiking neurons. Tech. rep., MIT-press, 1998.
[154] GHOSE, S., BOROUMAND, A., KIM, J. S., GÓMEZ-LUNA, J., AND MUTLU, O. Processing-in-memory: A workloaddriven perspective.
IBM Journal of Research and Development 63, 6 (2019), 3–1.
[155] GIBSON, J. J. The theory of affordances. Hilldale, USA 1, 2 (1977), 67–82.
[156] GOLDSTEIN, R. A., AND SOYER, O. S. Evolution of taxis responses in virtual bacteria: non-adaptive dynamics. PLOS
computational biology 4, 5 (2008), e1000084.
[157] GREEN, J. B., AND SHARPE, J. Positional information and reaction-diffusion: two big ideas in developmental biology combine.
Development 142, 7 (2015), 1203–1211.
[158] GREER-PHILLIPS, S. E., ALEXANDRE, G., TAYLOR, B. L., AND ZHULIN, I. B. Aer and tsr guide escherichia coli in spatial gradients of
oxidizable substrates. Microbiology 149, 9 (2003), 2661–2667.
[159] GUNKEL, D. J. A vindication of the rights of machines. In Machine ethics and robot ethics. Routledge, 2020, pp. 511–530.
[160] HAENLEIN, M., AND KAPLAN, A. A brief history of artificial intelligence: On the past, present, and future of artificial intelligence.
California management review 61, 4 (2019), 5–14.
[161] HAKEN, H. Synergetics. Physics Bulletin 28, 9 (1977), 412.
[162] HAN, Y., HUANG, G., SONG, S., YANG, L., WANG, H., AND WANG, Y. Dynamic neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 44, 11 (2021), 7436–7456.
[163] HASELAGER, D. R., BOERS, S. N., JONGSMA, K. R., VINKERS, C. H., BROEKMAN, M. L., AND BREDENOORD, A. L. Breeding brains? patients’
and laymen’s perspectives on cerebral organoids. Regenerative medicine 15, 12 (2020), 2351–2360.
[164] HAUSER, H., IJSPEERT, A. J., FÜCHSLIN, R. M., PFEIFER, R., AND MAASS, W. Towards a theoretical foundation for morphological
computation with compliant bodies. Biological cybernetics 105 (2011), 355–370.
[165] HEBB, D. The Organization of Behavior. Wiley, New York, 1949.
[166] HEIDEGGER, M. Being and time. Suny Press, 2010.
[167] HEYLIGHEN, F. Principles of systems and cybernetics: an evolutionary perspective. Cybernetics and systems 92, 1992 (1992),
3–10.
[168] HEYLIGHEN, F., AND GERSHENSON, C. The meaning of self-organization in computing. IEEE Intelligent Systems 18, 4 (2003).
[169] HEYLIGHEN, F., AND JOSLYN, C. Cybernetics and second-order cybernetics. Encyclopedia of physical science & technology 4
(2001), 155–170.
[170] HINTON, G. The forward-forward algorithm: Some preliminary investigations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13345 (2022).
[171] HINTON, G. E. Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence. Neural computation 14, 8 (2002), 1771–
1800.
[172] HINTON, G. E., ET AL. What kind of graphical model is the brain? In IJCAI (2005), vol. 5, pp. 1765–1775.
[173] HÖFER, S., BEKRIS, K., HANDA, A., GAMBOA, J. C., MOZIFIAN, M., GOLEMO, F., ATKESON, C., FOX, D., GOLDBERG, K., LEONARD, J., ET AL.
Sim2real in robotics and automation: Applications and challenges. IEEE transactions on automation science and
engineering 18, 2 (2021), 398–400.
30
Preprint
[174] HOFFMAN, D. D., SINGH, M., AND PRAKASH, C. The interface theory of perception. Psychonomic bulletin & review 22 (2015),
1480–1506.
[175] HOGAN, M. K., HAMILTON, G. F., AND HORNER, P. J. Neural stimulation and molecular mechanisms of plasticity and
regeneration: a review. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 14 (2020), 271.
[176] HOHWY, J. The predictive mind. OUP Oxford, 2013.
[177] HOHWY, J. The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 2 (2016), 259–285.
[178] HOLLAND, J. H. Complex adaptive systems. Daedalus 121, 1 (1992), 17–30.
[179] HORDIJK, W., AND STEEL, M. Autocatalytic networks at the basis of life’s origin and organization. Life 8, 4 (2018), 62.
[180] HORNSBY, J. Simple mindedness: In defense of naive naturalism in the philosophy of mind. Harvard University Press, 1997.
[181] HORST, S. Naturalisms in philosophy of mind. Philosophy Compass 4, 1 (2009), 219–254.
[182] HUANG, G., SUN, Y., LIU, Z., SEDRA, D., AND WEINBERGER, K. Q. Deep networks with stochastic depth. In Computer Vision–ECCV
2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14 (2016),
Springer, pp. 646–661.
[183] ITOH, M., AND CHUA, L. O. Memristor oscillators. International journal of bifurcation and chaos 18, 11 (2008), 3183–3206.
[184] IZHIKEVICH, E. M. Solving the distal reward problem through linkage of stdp and dopamine signaling. Cerebral cortex 17, 10
(2007), 2443–2452.
[185] JAPYASSÚ, H. F., AND LALAND, K. N. Extended spider cognition. Animal Cognition 20, 3 (2017), 375–395.
[186] JARZYNSKI, C. Nonequilibrium equality for free energy differences. Physical Review Letters 78, 14 (1997), 2690.
[187] JÉKELY, G. Evolution of phototaxis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364, 1531 (2009),
2795–2808.
[188] JEZIORE-SASSOON, Y., HAMBLIN, P. A., BOOTLE-WILBRAHAM, C. A., POOLE, P. S., AND ARMITAGE, J. P. Metabolism is required for
chemotaxis to sugars in rhodobacter sphaeroides. Microbiology 144, 1 (1998), 229–239.
[189] JOSLYN, C. Hierarchy, strict hierarchy, and generalized information theory. In Proc. ISSS (1991), vol. 1, pp. 123–132.
[190] KALMAN, R. E. A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems. Journal of Basic Engineering 82, 1 (03 1960),
35–45.
[191] KANT, I. Critique of judgment. Hackett Publishing, 1987.
[192] KANT, I., AND SCHNEEWIND, J. B. Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals. Yale University Press, 2002.
[193] KAUFFMAN, S. A. The origins of order: Self-organization and selection in evolution. Oxford University Press, USA, 1993.
[194] KAVANAGH, A. J., AND RICHARDS, O. W. The autocatalytic growth-curve. The American Naturalist 68, 714 (1934), 54–59.
[195] KIERKEGAARD, S., ET AL. Journalen. (No Title) (1843).
[196] KIM, H., SAH, M. P., YANG, C., CHO, S., AND CHUA, L. O. Memristor emulator for memristor circuit applications. IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 59, 10 (2012), 2422–2431.
[197] KINGMA, D. P., AND WELLING, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 (2013).
[198] KIRCHHOFF, M., PARR, T., PALACIOS, E., FRISTON, K., AND KIVERSTEIN, J. The markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference
and the free energy principle. Journal of The royal society interface 15, 138 (2018), 20170792.
[199] KIRK, R. Sentience and behaviour. Mind 83, 329 (1974), 43–60.
[200] KLIR, G. J., AND ASHBY, W. R. Requisite variety and its implications for the control of complex systems. Facets of systems
science (1991), 405–417.
[201] KOHAN, A., RIETMAN, E. A., AND SIEGELMANN, H. T. Signal propagation: The framework for learning and inference in a forward
pass. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2023).
[202] KOHONEN, T. The self-organizing map. Proceedings of the IEEE 78, 9 (1990), 1464–1480.
[203] KÖRBER, M., LANGE, J., REDISKE, S., STEINMANN, S., AND GLÜCK, R. Comparing popular simulation environments in the scope of
robotics and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.04616 (2021).
[204] KRESTINSKAYA, O., JAMES, A. P., AND CHUA, L. O. Neuromemristive circuits for edge computing: A review. IEEE transactions on
neural networks and learning systems 31, 1 (2019), 4–23.
31
Preprint
[205] KUCHLING, F., FIELDS, C., AND LEVIN, M. Metacognition as a consequence of competing evolutionary time scales. Entropy 24,
5 (2022), 601.
[206] KUON, I., TESSIER, R., ROSE, J., ET AL. Fpga architecture: Survey and challenges. Foundations and Trends® in Electronic Design
Automation 2, 2 (2008), 135–253.
[207] LAIRD, J. E., LEBIERE, C., AND ROSENBLOOM, P. S. A standard model of the mind: Toward a common computational framework
across artificial intelligence, cognitive science, neuroscience, and robotics. AI Magazine 38, 4 (2017), 13–26. [207] LAKOFF,
G., AND JOHNSON, M. Metaphors we live by. University of Chicago press, 2008.
[208] LANDAUER, R. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process. IBM journal of research and development 5, 3
(1961), 183–191.
[209] LANGTON, C. G. Studying artificial life with cellular automata. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 22, 1-3 (1986), 120–149.
[210] LASCHI, C., AND CIANCHETTI, M. Soft robotics: new perspectives for robot bodyware and control. Frontiers in bioengineering
and biotechnology 2 (2014), 3.
[211] LASCHI, C., MAZZOLAI, B., AND CIANCHETTI, M. Soft robotics: Technologies and systems pushing the boundaries of robot
abilities. Science robotics 1, 1 (2016), eaah3690.
[212] LAZCANO, A., AND MILLER, S. L. On the origin of metabolic pathways. Journal of Molecular Evolution 49 (1999), 424–431.
[213] LE MAGNEN, J. Hunger, vol. 3. CUP Archive, 1985.
[214] LEE, B. X., KJAERULF, F., TURNER, S., COHEN, L., DONNELLY, P. D., MUGGAH, R., DAVIS, R., REALINI, A., KIESELBACH, B., MACGREGOR, L. S.,
ET AL. Transforming our world: implementing the 2030 agenda through sustainable development goal indicators. Journal
of public health policy 37 (2016), 13–31.
[215] LEE, D.-H., ZHANG, S., FISCHER, A., AND BENGIO, Y. Difference target propagation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2015).
[216] LEE, D.-H., ZHANG, S., FISCHER, A., AND BENGIO, Y. Difference target propagation. In Proc. ECMLPKDD (2015).
[217] LEE, M. K. F., CUI, Y., SOMU, T., LUO, T., ZHOU, J., TANG, W. T., WONG, W.-F., AND GOH, R. S. M. A system-level simulator for rram-
based neuromorphic computing chips. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization (TACO) 15, 4 (2019), 1–
24.
[218] LEMARÉCHAL, J.-D., JEDYNAK, M., TREBAUL, L., BOYER, A., TADEL, F., BHATTACHARJEE, M., DEMAN, P., TUYISENGE, V., AYOUBIAN, L., HUGUES,
E., ET AL. A brain atlas of axonal and synaptic delays based on modelling of cortico-cortical evoked potentials. Brain 145, 5
(2022), 1653–1667.
[219] LEVIN, M. The computational boundary of a “self”: developmental bioelectricity drives multicellularity and scale-free
cognition. Frontiers in psychology 10 (2019), 2688.
[220] LEVIN, M. Life, death, and self: Fundamental questions of primitive cognition viewed through the lens of body plasticity
and synthetic organisms. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 564 (2021), 114–133.
[221] LINNAINMAA, S. The representation of the cumulative rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expansion of the local
rounding errors. PhD thesis, Master’s Thesis (in Finnish), Univ. Helsinki, 1970.
[222] LIU, C., ZOPH, B., NEUMANN, M., SHLENS, J., HUA, W., LI, L.-J., FEI-FEI, L., YUILLE, A., HUANG, J., AND MURPHY, K. Progressive neural
architecture search. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) (2018), pp. 19–34.
[223] LUND, H. H., HALLAM, J., AND LEE, W.-P. Evolving robot morphology. In Proceedings of 1997 IEEE International Conference on
Evolutionary Computation (ICEC’97) (1997), IEEE, pp. 197–202.
[224] LYON, P., KEIJZER, F., ARENDT, D., AND LEVIN, M. Reframing cognition: getting down to biological basics, 2021.
[225] MAASS, W. Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models. Neural networks 10, 9 (1997),
1659–1671.
[226] MACENSKI, S., FOOTE, T., GERKEY, B., LALANCETTE, C., AND WOODALL, W. Robot operating system 2: Design, architecture, and uses
in the wild. Science Robotics 7, 66 (2022), eabm6074.
[227] MACKAY, D. M. Towards an information-flow model of human behaviour. British Journal of Psychology 47, 1 (1956), 30–
43.
[228] MADADI ASL, M., VALIZADEH, A., AND TASS, P. A. Dendritic and axonal propagation delays may shape neuronal networks with
plastic synapses. Frontiers in physiology 9 (2018), 1849.
[229] MANICKA, S., AND LEVIN, M. The cognitive lens: a primer on conceptual tools for analysing information processing in
developmental and regenerative morphogenesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 374, 1774 (2019),
20180369.
32
Preprint
[230] MANYIKA, J. An overview of bard: an early experiment with generative ai, 2023.
[231] MARTIN, E., ERNOULT, M., LAYDEVANT, J., LI, S., QUERLIOZ, D., PETRISOR, T., AND GROLLIER, J. Eqspike: spike-driven equilibrium
propagation for neuromorphic implementations. Iscience 24, 3 (2021).
[232] MASLEJ, N., FATTORINI, L., BRYNJOLFSSON, E., ETCHEMENDY, J., LIGETT, K., LYONS, T., MANYIKA, J., NGO,
H., NIEBLES, J. C., PARLI, V., ET AL. The ai index 2023 annual report. AI Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered
AI, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (2023).
[233] MATHEWS, J., AND LEVIN, M. Gap junctional signaling in pattern regulation: physiological network connectivity instructs
growth and form. Developmental neurobiology 77, 5 (2017), 643–673.
[234] MATURANA, H. R., AND VARELA, F. J. Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the living, vol. 42. Springer Science &
Business Media, 1991.
[235] MCEWEN, B. Stress: Homeostasis, rheostasis, reactive scope, allostasis and allostatic load. Ann N Y Acad Sci. (2017). [236]
MCEWEN, B., AND WINGFIELD, J. Allostasis and allostatic load. J Clin Nurs (2007).
[236] MEDRANO, J., FRISTON, K. J., AND ZEIDMAN, P. Linking fast and slow: the case for generative models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.10618 (2023).
[237] MESIBOV, R., AND ADLER, J. Chemotaxis toward amino acids in escherichia coli. Journal of Bacteriology 112, 1 (1972), 315–
326.
[238] MILES, L., NIND, L., AND MACRAE, C. Moving through time. Psychological Science 21, 2 (2010), 222.
[239] MNIH, V., KAVUKCUOGLU, K., SILVER, D., GRAVES, A., ANTONOGLOU, I., WIERSTRA, D., AND RIEDMILLER, M. Playing atari with deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[240] MONTES, G. A., AND GOERTZEL, B. Distributed, decentralized, and democratized artificial intelligence. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 141 (2019), 354–358.
[241] MOROWITZ, H., AND SMITH, E. Energy flow and the organization of life. Complexity 13, 1 (2007), 51–59.
[242] MOVELLAN, J. R. Contrastive Hebbian learning in the continuous Hopfield model. In Connectionist Models. Elsevier, 1991,
pp. 10–17.
[243] MÜLLER, V. C., AND HOFFMANN, M. What is morphological computation? on how the body contributes to cognition and
control. Artificial life 23, 1 (2017), 1–24.
[244] MUSTAPHA, M. U., HALIMOON, N., ET AL. Microorganisms and biosorption of heavy metals in the environment: a review paper.
J. Microb. Biochem. Technol 7, 5 (2015), 253–256.
[245] NAKAGAKI, T. Smart behavior of true slime mold in a labyrinth. Research in Microbiology 152, 9 (2001), 767–770.
[246] NAKAGAKI, T., YAMADA, H., AND TÓTH, Á. Maze-solving by an amoeboid organism. Nature 407, 6803 (2000), 470–470.
[247] N’DRI, A. W., BARBIER, T., TEULIÈRE, C., AND TRIESCH, J. Predictive coding light: learning compact visual codes by combining
excitatory and inhibitory spike timing-dependent plasticity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (2023), pp. 3996–4005.
[248] NEWEN, A., DE BRUIN, L., AND GALLAGHER, S. The Oxford handbook of 4E cognition. Oxford University Press, 2018.
[249] NEWSHOLME, E. A., AND START, C. Regulation in metabolism / [by] E. A. Newsholme and C. Start. Wiley, London ; New York,
1973.
[250] NOGUEIRAS, R., TSCHÖP, M. H., AND ZIGMAN, J. M. Central nervous system regulation of energy metabolism: ghrelin versus
leptin. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1126, 1 (2008), 14–19.
[251] NØKLAND, A. Direct feedback alignment provides learning in deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (2016).
[252] O’BRIEN, J. L. Optical quantum computing. Science 318, 5856 (2007), 1567–1570.
[253] OMONDI, A. R. FPGA implementations of neural networks. Springer, 2006.
[254] ORORBIA, A. Contrastive-signal-dependent plasticity: Forward-forward learning of spiking neural systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.18187 (2023).
[255] ORORBIA, A. Spiking neural predictive coding for continually learning from data streams. Neurocomputing 544 (2023),
126292.
[256] ORORBIA, A., ELSAID, A., AND DESELL, T. Investigating recurrent neural network memory structures using neuro-evolution. In
Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference (2019), pp. 446–455.
33
Preprint
[257] ORORBIA, A., HAFFNER, P., REITTER, D., AND GILES, C. L. Learning to adapt by minimizing discrepancy. arXiv:1711.11542 (2017).
[258] ORORBIA, A., AND KELLY, M. A. Cogngen: Building the kernel for a hyperdimensional predictive processing cognitive
architecture. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (2022).
[259] ORORBIA, A., AND KIFER, D. The neural coding framework for learning generative models. Nature communications 13, 1
(2022), 2064.
[260] ORORBIA, A., AND KIFER, D. The neural coding framework for learning generative models. Nature communications 13, 1
(2022), 2064.
[261] ORORBIA, A., AND MALI, A. Convolutional neural generative coding: Scaling predictive coding to natural images. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.12047 (2022).
[262] ORORBIA, A., AND MALI, A. The predictive forward-forward algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01452 (2022).
[263] ORORBIA, A., MALI, A., GILES, C. L., AND KIFER, D. Continual learning of recurrent neural networks by locally aligning distributed
representations. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 31, 10 (2020), 4267–4278.
[264] ORORBIA, A. G., AND MALI, A. Biologically motivated algorithms for propagating local target representations. In Proc. AAAI
(2019), vol. 33, pp. 4651–4658.
[265] ORORBIA, A. G., MALI, A., KIFER, D., AND GILES, C. L. Backpropagation-free deep learning with recursive local representation
alignment. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2023), vol. 37, pp. 9327–9335.
[266] PACE, N. R. The universal nature of biochemistry. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98, 3 (2001), 805–808.
[267] PACKER, H. L., AND ARMITAGE, J. P. Inverted behavioural responses in wild-type rhodobacter sphaeroides to temporal stimuli.
FEMS microbiology letters 189, 2 (2000), 299–304.
[268] PALACIOS, E. R., RAZI, A., PARR, T., KIRCHHOFF, M., AND FRISTON, K. On markov blankets and hierarchical self-organisation. Journal
of theoretical biology 486 (2020), 110089.
[269] PARR, T., SAJID, N., AND FRISTON, K. J. Modules or mean-fields? Entropy 22, 5 (2020), 552.
[270] PASK, G. Introduction different kinds of cybernetics. In New perspectives on cybernetics: self-organization, autonomy and
connectionism. Springer, 1992, pp. 11–31.
[271] PASK, G., ET AL. Physical analogues to the growth of a concept. In Mechanization of thought processes, Symposium (1958),
vol. 10, pp. 765–794.
[272] PATTERSON, D., GONZALEZ, J., LE, Q., LIANG, C., MUNGUIA, L.-M., ROTHCHILD, D., SO, D., TEXIER, M., AND DEAN, J. Carbon emissions
and large neural network training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10350 (2021).
[273] PEARL, J. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan kaufmann, 1988.
[274] PETANJEK, Z., JUDAŠ, M., ŠIMIC´ , G., RAŠIN, M. R., UYLINGS, H. B., RAKIC, P., AND KOSTOVIC´ , I. Extraordinary neoteny of synaptic
spines in the human prefrontal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 32 (2011), 13281–13286.
[275] PEZZULO, G., AND LEVIN, M. Re-membering the body: applications of computational neuroscience to the top-down control
of regeneration of limbs and other complex organs. Integrative Biology 7, 12 (2015), 1487–1517.
[276] PFEIFER, R., AND BONGARD, J. How the body shapes the way we think: a new view of intelligence. MIT press, 2006.
[277] PFEIFER, R., AND IIDA, F. Embodied artificial intelligence: Trends and challenges. Lecture notes in computer science (2004),
1–26.
[278] PFEIFER, R., AND SCHEIER, C. Understanding intelligence. MIT press, 2001.
[279] PICKERING, A. Beyond design: cybernetics, biological computers and hylozoism. Synthese 168, 3 (2009), 469–491.
[280] PICKERING, A. The cybernetic brain: Sketches of another future. University of Chicago Press, 2010.
[281] PLANK, J. S., GULLETT, B., FOSHIE, A. Z., ROSE, G. S., AND SCHUMAN, C. D. Disclosure of a neuromorphic starter kit. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.04526 (2022).
[282] PLANK, J. S., ZHENG, C., GULLETT, B., SKUDA, N., RIZZO, C., SCHUMAN, C. D., AND ROSE, G. S. The case for risp: A reduced instruction
spiking processor. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14016 (2022).
[283] POWERS, W. T. Behavior: The control of perception. Aldine Chicago, 1973.
[284] PUTNUM, H. Brains in a vat. Reason, Truth and History (1981).
[285] RABINOVICH, M. I., FRISTON, K. J., AND VARONA, P. Principles of brain dynamics: global state interactions. MIT Press, 2012.
34
Preprint
[286] RADFORD, A., NARASIMHAN, K., SALIMANS, T., SUTSKEVER, I., ET AL. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training.
In OpenAI (2018).
[287] RAKIC, P., BOURGEOIS, J.-P., AND GOLDMAN-RAKIC, P. S. Synaptic development of the cerebral cortex: implications for learning,
memory, and mental illness. Progress in brain research 102 (1994), 227–243.
[288] RAO, R. P., AND BALLARD, D. H. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical
receptive-field effects. Nature neuroscience 2, 1 (1999), 79–87.
[289] RAO, R. P. N. An optimal estimation approach to visual perception and learning. Vision Research 39, 11 (1999), 1963–1989.
[290] RICKLES, D., HAWE, P., AND SHIELL, A. A simple guide to chaos and complexity. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health
61, 11 (2007), 933–937.
[291] ROHDE, M. Enaction, embodiment, evolutionary robotics: simulation models for a post-cognitivist science of mind, vol. 1.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.
[292] ROSEN, R. Life itself: a comprehensive inquiry into the nature, origin, and fabrication of life. Columbia University Press,
1991.
[293] ROTH, W.-M., AND JORNET, A. Situated cognition. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science 4, 5 (2013), 463–478.
[294] RUMELHART, D. E., HINTON, G. E., AND WILLIAMS, R. J. Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
nature 323, 6088 (1986), 533–536.
[295] RUNGE, K., CARDOSO, C., AND DE CHEVIGNY, A. Dendritic spine plasticity: function and mechanisms. Frontiers in synaptic
neuroscience 12 (2020), 36.
[296] RYDER, R. D. Souls and sentientism. Between the Species 7, 1 (1991), 3.
[297] SALTER, M., KNOWLES, R. G., AND POGSON, C. I. Metabolic control. Essays in biochemistry 28 (1994), 1–12.
[298] SALVATORI, T., MALI, A., BUCKLEY, C. L., LUKASIEWICZ, T., RAO, R. P., FRISTON, K., AND ORORBIA, A.
Brain-inspired computational intelligence via predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07870 (2023).
[299] SARAND, I., ÖSTERBERG, S., HOLMQVIST, S., HOLMFELDT, P., SKÄRFSTAD, E., PARALES, R. E., AND SHINGLER, V. Metabolism-dependent
taxis towards (methyl) phenols is coupled through the most abundant of three polar localized aer-like proteins of
pseudomonas putida. Environmental Microbiology 10, 5 (2008), 1320–1334.
[300] SCELLIER, B., AND BENGIO, Y. Equilibrium propagation: Bridging the gap between energy-based models and backpropagation.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 11 (2017), 24.
[301] SCELLIER, B., AND BENGIO, Y. Equivalence of equilibrium propagation and recurrent backpropagation. Neural computation 31,
2 (2019), 312–329.
[302] SCHWARTENBECK, P., PASSECKER, J., HAUSER, T. U., FITZGERALD, T. H., KRONBICHLER, M., AND FRISTON, K. J. Computational mechanisms
of curiosity and goal-directed exploration. elife 8 (2019), e41703.
[303] SCHWARTZ, R., DODGE, J., SMITH, N. A., AND ETZIONI, O. Green AI. Communications of the ACM 63, 12 (2020), 54–63.
[304] SENGUPTA, B., AND FRISTON, K. J. How robust are deep neural networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.11313 (2018).
[305] SENGUPTA, B., STEMMLER, M. B., AND FRISTON, K. J. Information and efficiency in the nervous system—a synthesis. PLoS
computational biology 9, 7 (2013), e1003157.
[306] SHAHRIARI, B., SWERSKY, K., WANG, Z., ADAMS, R. P., AND DE FREITAS, N. Taking the human out of the loop: A review of bayesian
optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE 104, 1 (2015), 148–175.
[307] SHAPIRO, J. A. Thinking about bacterial populations as multicellular organisms. Annual review of microbiology 52, 1 (1998),
81–104.
[308] SHAPIRO, L. Embodied cognition. Routledge, 2019.
[309] SHATZ, C. J. Impulse activity and the patterning of connections during cns development. Neuron 5, 6 (1990), 745–756.
[310] SIMON, H. A. The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of the American philosophical society 106, 6 (1962), 467–482.
[311] SIMON, H. A. The Sciences of the Artificial, 3 ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.
[312] SIMONTON, D. K. Creative thought as blind-variation and selective-retention: Combinatorial models of exceptional
creativity. Physics of life reviews 7, 2 (2010), 156–179.
[313] SMIRNOVA, L., CAFFO, B. S., GRACIAS, D. H., HUANG, Q., MORALES PANTOJA, I. E., TANG, B., ZACK, D. J., BERLINICKE, C. A., BOYD, J. L.,
HARRIS, T. D., ET AL. Organoid intelligence (oi): the new frontier in biocomputing and intelligence-in-a-dish. Frontiers in
Science (2023), 0.
35
Preprint
[314] SMIRNOVA, L., AND HARTUNG, T. Neuronal cultures playing pong: First steps toward advanced screening and biological
computing. Neuron 110, 23 (2022), 3855–3856.
[315] SNOEK, J., LAROCHELLE, H., AND ADAMS, R. P. Practical bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. Advances in
neural information processing systems 25 (2012).
[316] SOYER, O. S., SALATHE, M., AND BONHOEFFER, S. Signal transduction networks: topology, response and biochemical processes.
Journal of theoretical biology 238, 2 (2006), 416–425.
[317] SPRUSTON, N. Pyramidal neurons: dendritic structure and synaptic integration. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9, 3 (2008),
206–221.
[318] STERLING, P. Allostasis: a new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. Handbook of life stress, cognition and health (1988).
[319] STERLING, P. Principles of allostasis: Optimal design, predictive regulation, pathophysiology, and rational therapeutics.
Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Physiological Adaptation (2004), 17.
[320] STERLING, P. Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation. Physiology & behavior 106, 1 (2012), 5–15.
[321] STOCCO, A., SIBERT, C., STEINE-HANSON, Z., KOH, N., LAIRD, J. E., LEBIERE, C. J., AND ROSENBLOOM, P. Analysis of the human
connectome data supports the notion of a “common model of cognition” for human and human-like intelligence across
domains. NeuroImage 235 (2021), 118035.
[322] STRUBELL, E., GANESH, A., AND MCCALLUM, A. Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Florence, Italy, July 2019), Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 3645–3650.
[323] TAMKIN, A., BRUNDAGE, M., CLARK, J., AND GANGULI, D. Understanding the capabilities, limitations, and societal impact of large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02503 (2021).
[324] TAYLOR, B. L. Role of proton motive force in sensory transduction in bacteria. Annual review of microbiology 37, 1 (1983),
551–573.
[325] TAYLOR, B. L., AND ZHULIN, I. B. In search of higher energy: metabolism-dependent behaviour in bacteria. Molecular
microbiology 28, 4 (1998), 683–690.
[326] TENENBAUM, J. B., KEMP, C., GRIFFITHS, T. L., AND GOODMAN, N. D. How to grow a mind: Statistics, structure, and abstraction.
science 331, 6022 (2011), 1279–1285.
[327] TERRY, R. A., AND CAPEHART, B. L. A return to the homeostat. In Seventh Symposium on Adaptive Processes (1968), IEEE, pp.
62–62.
[328] TERVO, D. G. R., TENENBAUM, J. B., AND GERSHMAN, S. J. Toward the neural implementation of structure learning. Current
opinion in neurobiology 37 (2016), 99–105.
[329] THELEN, E., AND SMITH, L. B. A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action. MIT press, 1994.
[330] THOMAS, A. Memristor-based neural networks. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 46, 9 (2013), 093001.
[331] THOMPSON, E. Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind. Harvard University Press, 2010.
[332] THOMPSON, J. A. On growth and form, 1917.
[333] TOUVRON, H., LAVRIL, T., IZACARD, G., MARTINET, X., LACHAUX, M.-A., LACROIX, T., ROZIÈRE, B., GOYAL, N., HAMBRO, E., AZHAR, F., ET AL.
Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
[334] TURING, A. M. The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Bulletin of mathematical biology 52 (1990), 153–197.
[335] ULAM, S. M. Some ideas and prospects in biomathematics. Annual review of biophysics and bioengineering 1, 1 (1972),
277–292.
[336] UNGERLEIDER, L. G., AND HAXBY, J. V. ‘what’and ‘where’in the human brain. Current opinion in neurobiology 4, 2 (1994), 157–
165.
[337] VAN DER SCHYFF, D., SCHIAVIO, A., WALTON, A., VELARDO, V., AND CHEMERO, A. Musical creativity and the embodied mind:
Exploring the possibilities of 4e cognition and dynamical systems theory. Music & Science 1 (2018), 2059204318792319.
[338] VANDENBERG, L. N., ADAMS, D. S., AND LEVIN, M. Normalized shape and location of perturbed craniofacial structures in the
xenopus tadpole reveal an innate ability to achieve correct morphology. Developmental Dynamics 241, 5 (2012), 863–
878.
[339] VARELA, F. G., MATURANA, H. R., AND URIBE, R. Autopoiesis: The organization of living systems, its characterization and a
model. Biosystems 5, 4 (1974), 187–196.
36
Preprint
[340] VARELA, F. J. Autopoiesis and a biology of intentionality. In Proceedings of the workshop “Autopoiesis and Perception”
(1992), Dublin City University, pp. 4–14.
[341] VARELA, F. J. Patterns of life: Intertwining identity and cognition. Brain and cognition 34, 1 (1997), 72–87.
[342] VARELA, F. J., THOMPSON, E., AND ROSCH, E. The embodied mind, revised edition: Cognitive science and human experience. MIT
press, 2017.
[343] VASWANI, A., SHAZEER, N., PARMAR, N., USZKOREIT, J., JONES, L., GOMEZ, A. N., KAISER, Ł., AND
POLOSUKHIN, I. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[344] VON BERTALANFFY, L. The theory of open systems in physics and biology. Science 111, 2872 (1950), 23–29.
[345] VON NEUMANN, J., BURKS, A. W., ET AL. Theory of self-reproducing automata. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 5, 1
(1966), 3–14.
[346] VON STOCKAR, U., AND LIU, J.-S. Does microbial life always feed on negative entropy? thermodynamic analysis of microbial
growth. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Bioenergetics 1412, 3 (1999), 191–211.
[347] WARD, D., SILVERMAN, D., AND VILLALOBOS, M. Introduction: The varieties of enactivism. Topoi 36 (2017), 365–375.
[348] WASSERMAN, L. Bayesian model selection and model averaging. Journal of mathematical psychology 44, 1 (2000), 92–107.
[349] WEBRE, D. J., WOLANIN, P. M., AND STOCK, J. B. Bacterial chemotaxis. Current Biology 13, 2 (2003), R47–R49.
[350] WESTERHOFF, H. V., GROEN, A. K., AND WANDERS, R. J. Modern theories of metabolic control and their applications. Bioscience
Reports 4, 1 (1984), 1–22.
[351] WIENER, N. Cybernetics. Scientific American 179, 5 (1948), 14–19.
[352] WIENER, N. Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. MIT press, 2019.
[353] WILSON, A. D., AND GOLONKA, S. Embodied cognition is not what you think it is. Frontiers in psychology 4 (2013), 58.
[354] WILSON, D. B. Three microbial strategies for plant cell wall degradation. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1125,
1 (2008), 289–297.
[355] WILSON, M. Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic bulletin & review 9 (2002), 625–636.
[356] WILSON, R. A. Collective memory, group minds, and the extended mind thesis. Cognitive processing 6, 4 (2005), 227–236.
[357] WINN, J., BISHOP, C. M., AND JAAKKOLA, T. Variational message passing. Journal of Machine Learning Research 6, 4 (2005).
[358] WOLFRAM, S. Cellular automata as simple self-organizing systems. Tech. rep., Caltech, 1982.
[359] WOLFRAM, S. Statistical mechanics of cellular automata. Reviews of modern physics 55, 3 (1983), 601.
[360] WOLPERT, L. Positional information and the spatial pattern of cellular differentiation. Journal of theoretical biology 25, 1
(1969), 1–47.
[361] YAMASHITA, Y. M., INABA, M., AND BUSZCZAK, M. Specialized intercellular communications via cytonemes and nanotubes.
Annual review of cell and developmental biology 34 (2018), 59–84.
[362] YEDIDIA, J. S., FREEMAN, W. T., AND WEISS, Y. Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation
algorithms. IEEE Transactions on information theory 51, 7 (2005), 2282–2312.
[363] YOKAWA, K., AND BALUŠKA, F. Sense of space: Tactile sense for exploratory behavior of roots. Communicative & Integrative
Biology 11, 2 (2018), 1–5.
[364] YOUNG, J. F. Cybernetics. American Elsevier Pub. Co.„ 1969.
[365] YUILLE, A., AND KERSTEN, D. Vision as bayesian inference: analysis by synthesis? Trends in cognitive sciences 10, 7 (2006),
301–308.
[366] ZHU, Y., WONG, J., MANDLEKAR, A., AND MARTÍN-MARTÍN, R. robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for
robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293 (2020).
[367] ZHULIN, I. B., ROWSELL, E. H., JOHNSON, M. S., AND TAYLOR, B. L. Glycerol elicits energy taxis of escherichia coli and salmonella
typhimurium. Journal of bacteriology 179, 10 (1997), 3196–3201.
[368] ZOU, X., XU, S., CHEN, X., YAN, L., AND HAN, Y. Breaking the von neumann bottleneck: architecture-level processing-in-memory
technology. Science China Information Sciences 64, 6 (2021), 160404.
37
Preprint
Supplementary Material
A.1 Further Questions Related to the Mortal Computation Thesis
Questions (and sub-questions) that we foresee as relevant and/or essential to the enterprise of mortal
computation research are:
• What are useful measures of the thermodynamic efficiency of a given/particular mortal computer and
how might this facilitate a basis for comparison/benchmarking?
• What are useful, minimal niches or environments that could be used to prototype, develop, and
analyze mortal computers? Can these be simulated without requiring access to physical material and,
if so, what discrepancies are introduced by relying on synthetic/simulations of a (given) niche?
• What is the base set of homeostatic maintenance functions, and how would they be designed, that a
mortal computer needs in a given environment? Notice that this question will require different
answers depending on the chosen bodily substrate and target niche.
– How would an allostatic process be developed to automatically maintain/orchestrate these
homeostatic processes and what interactions might develop?
– How do different homeostatic/allostatic functions affect higher-level emergent cognitive
ability/behavior? How does morphology affect it?
– How much functionality should be initially designed versus how much should be allowed to
(possibly) emerge? Is it possible to craft the relevant inductive biases/priors without using an
outer evolutionary process?
• What degree or level of fidelity is needed to properly simulate a mortal computer in the absence of
access to real-world substrate or niche(s)?
– Does the possible domain distribution gap induced by simulating bodies/niches prevent/hinder
effective mortal computing design and analysis?
• What would mortal computation look like if the internal morphology consists of neuronal elements
that communicate via spikes/spike-trains? In this case, what are useful substrate-niche candidate
pairings related to neuromorphic edge-computing that would foster engineering of morphogenetic,
self-replicating in silico systems?
• What would a cognitive (control) architecture look like that fundamentally adheres the principles of a
mortal computer that exhibits elementary, embodied, and enactive scopes of functionality?
– What aspects of embedded and extended cognitive functionality emerge when collectives or
groups of mortal computing entities interact with each other, either adversarially or
cooperatively?
• What can be learned from failures and successes of biological/soft computers and/or chimeric
computing systems and robots to further assist in the formulating of a mortal computer system?
– How do degenerate states, or those pertaining to poor “health”, emerge in a mortal computer?
How does the MC’s behavior change as a result?
• Can we design essential variables that engender/facilitate human value-aligned intelligent systems?
– What would this look like in terms of morphological encoding/structural constraints/set-points?
A.2 Extant Real-World Mortal Computers
The Homeostat. Ashby’s homeostat [24, 327, 74, 21], and later updates [327], is a powerful example of a real-world
adaptive regulator implemented in a non-biological medium [74, 279]. It is one of the first real-world examples of
MC that implements an internal model of control and that exhibits requisite variety, ultrastability, as well as self-
regulating processes. The homeostat was a control system that could maintain stability in the face of itinerant
environmental perturbations. The homeostat’s imperative was to keep the value of a control variable near a target
value within in some specified range and the system would evaluate whether a particular set of values made it an
effective controller of its environment. If the controlled variable was not in its desired range after a period of settling
time, a stepping relay would choose another random set of values. The homeostat’s search through the possible
stepper switch combinations only took as long as the time needed for mechanical switching and the
electromechanical circuit to reach its steady state, providing an example of computing where the only costs are
those of the system’s thermodynamics (Section 2). Furthermore, the homeostat demonstrates the cybernetic
principle of BVSR – its parts (subsystems) that do the ‘selecting’ do not have any ‘understanding’ or knowledge of
38
Preprint
the detailed processes that they control or what is the optimal next action to take. Intriguingly, the homeostat could
adapt to physical damage, i.e., a wire is cut, given that the stepper switch could substitute another circuit
configuration in such a context [283]. Notice that the original homeostat adapted according to a trial-and-error
reactive process [24, 21] and is, by this paper’s definition, a homeostatic MC, embodying all five properties. An
important extension of the homeostat was to include a memory mechanism that would ensure that past successful
trials could bias the system’s adaptation, speeding up its convergence to stable states [73]. This strengthened the
homeostat system with respect to property 4 of our definition, as the learning became more sophisticated and
provided the system with some measure of anticipatory mechanisms, thus making the homeostat an “allostat” and
more akin an allostatic MC.
The Electrochemical Thread Network. The electrochemical thread (or “ear”) of Pask and Beer [271, 39, 40] — a
“maverick machine”25 [54] — could be considered an intriguing example of a mortal computer, particularly one that
demonstrated a form of learning, adaptation, and morphogenesis with self-replication properties. The system itself
comprised a few platinum electrodes inserted into a dish of an iron sulphate solution that were connected to an
electrical source; in this setup, metallic iron threads would form between electrodes where maximal lines of current
would flow. Such threads would exhibit low resistance relative to the solution and, as a result, current would flow
through these lines if electrical activation were repeated. Furthermore, if no current were passed through a thread,
the thread would readily dissolve back into its acidic solution. Interestingly, these threads could, over time, self-
assemble into larger, more stable, cooperative structures by absorbing neighboring unstable sub-structures. It was
observed that, if a stable thread network grew — and the current to the electrodes was redistributed — a new
network would emerge. However, if the same current were reset to its original distribution, the thread network
would regrow its original structure. The longer that a thread network stably grew, the slower it would break down
and the faster it would return to its original structure upon a reset of the current (demonstrating ultrastability).
The thread network’s response to sound waves and other environmental perturbations, e.g., vibrations, was
studied. The system was able to distinguish between sounds of different volume (50 Hertz versus 100 Hertz),
magnetism alterations, and pH differences. In addition, the electrochemical thread system would respond, given
positive reinforcement, by growing sensor organs of its own accord [271]. The system was able to create filters that
would be conducive to its survival and incorporate them into its morphology.
Xenobots. A more recent development in soft robotics is the xenobot system [30, 220, 57, 87, 56], which exhibits
emergent ‘intelligent’ behavior from a swarm of simple biological robotic agents that self-organize in response to
the structure of their environment. A xenobot is a small, self-healing biological machine based on frog cells, capable
of moving a payload and, when grouped into a collective, able to engage in cooperative behavior. While the first
generation of xenobots were constructed via the manual (top-down) surgical shaping of frog cardiac and skin cells
[57], the second generation was created from African frog Xenopus Leavis stem cells [56], which were shown to be
capable of self-assembling into “spheroids”. After a few days, some of these cells differentiated into cilia that served
as “leg” motor actuators, which facilitated rapid movement around a surface. Promisingly, xenobot systems
demonstrate that cells, removed from their original context, e.g., a frog body, can spontaneously specialize into
new roles; creating new bodily behavior and designs without waiting for a slow evolutionary process to select such
features.26
One of the most astounding properties of xenobots — that might serve mortal computation well — is that such
biomachines can specialize to act as sensors, motors for locomotion, elements of message-passing networks, and
mnemonic devices to facilitate information storage. This specialization is due to the xenobot’s ability to grow and
mature, which stands in contrast to artificial, metal-based systems: a xenobot self-heals, demonstrating a capacity
for repairing and restoring itself. This offers a concrete instance of the kind of morphogenesis that an autopoietic
mortal computer should exhibit. More importantly, a xenobot contains a metabolism; it is able to absorb and break
down chemicals, synthesizing and excreting proteins and chemicals, and is thus capable of surviving for months (if
placed in an environment containing nutrients). Xenobots not only provide insights into how basal cognition
emerges in multicellular organisms but also exemplifies implementation of a mortal computer in terms of a
biological substrate. Bio-machines like xenobots represent a manifestation of the co-design (property 5 of our
definition) that mortal computing rests upon; the “hardware” includes the genome and emergent cellular
structures, while the “software” is the cellular communication that underwrites the creation of the higher-level
25 A computing engine that could emerge out of numerous components without the components’ function being defined a
priori. In effect, the components serve as building material for the engine’s self-assembly into many possible entity
structures, depending on the environmental perturbations it receives [271].
26 It is worth pointing that the base design for the specific xenobot bodies was found via a separate, simulated evolutionary
process so as to side-step the cost of a more natural evolutionary/selection process.
39
Preprint
structures, i.e., tissues, organs, and limbs. With respect to our definitions, a xenobot system provides a strong
representation and specification of each and could serve as an inspiration for the design of in-silico MCs.
Fungal Computing. Another important example of a mortal computer is one based on fungus or molds [245, 19, 6,
7, 16, 8]. Fungal materials have been shown to work as computing devices: by reprogramming the geometrical
calculations — performed internally by mycelium networks, such as those that characterize the pink oyster
mushroom — the resultant electrical activity of the fungi can be used to create computing circuits. The complex
internal communication that occurs via spikes inside a mushroom can be translated into messages of an efficient
information transmission system that could serve as a building block for mortal computation. Notably, fungal
systems demonstrate resilience, a capacity for self-maintenance, as well as rapid growth [7]. These qualities afford
another promising instantiation of a simple MC; though the specification of the implicit generative model is far less
clear than that of xenobot systems.
Organoid Intelligence. Perhaps one of the more extreme examples of mortal computation in a biological substrate
is an in vitro preparation known as “intelligence-in-a-dish” or organoid intelligence [163, 314, 313]. Organoids are
3D tissue cultures that are generally derived from stem cells, capable of receiving genetic level instructions to self-
organize and grow into complex morphologies, such as tissues and minimal organs. “Sentient organoids” [138]
already stand to play an invaluable role for understanding biological information processing and careful study of
them could result in new energy-efficient computational models of finer-grained neural dynamics and synaptic
plasticity models.
Cell cultures and organoids possibly serve as a target for developing mortal computers as they are a living, growing
multicellular system, and embody all five properties above. Furthermore, organoid systems have already been
shown to be capable of simple reinforcement learning in tasks such as the Atari video game Pong [314]. The natural
evolution of an organoid structure, i.e., its “growth” and “decay”, could provide new ideas for emulating the
structural evolutionary component of MILS, undergirding a mortal computer’s long-term generalization ability
through the consolidation of knowledge acquired on the faster time-scales of inference and learning [236]. Crafting
MCs of greater complexity might benefit from the advances made at the intersection of neuromorphic-based
cognition and the bio-engineering of neuronal micro-physiological systems.
A.3 On Neuromorphic Systems and the Body-Niche Problem
Neuromorphic Systems of Biophysical Neurons. A neuromorphic computing chip — and other promising
hardware/substrate candidates, such as liquid crystal spatial light modulators [76, 109] and Field Programmable
Gate Arrays (FPGAs) [206, 253] — offers a useful (low-energy) pathway for mortal computing and resource-
constrained edge computation [204, 93]. Specifically, a neuromorphic chip offers a silicon structural substrate that
requires co-design of the software instantiating neuromimetic information processing and the physical hardware
that executes such routines. These chips arrange the computation such that processing, and memory are collocated
— i.e., in memory processing — thereby eluding the von Neumann bottleneck and offering fault tolerant, sparse
parallel and noise-robust computation [304]. Note that multiple chips may be interconnected, allowing the
construction of complex circuits that embody functionality such as associative memories or motor control.
Notably, the design of a neuromorphic chip, e.g., [95], is influenced by biophysical models of neuronal activity [153],
i.e., spiking neurons. Since biophysical neuronal models can emulate the properties of the neuromorphic hardware
that they will be executed on, the use of these chips represents a natural entanglement of physical instantiation
with software specification, in the context of co-design in silico. Specifically, the inference, learning, and selection
are directed by the neuromorphic substrate itself. If one further examines the information processing that
underpins networks of biophysical neurons, i.e., spiking neural networks [225], one notices that the inference of a
common type of neuron, the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) unit, operates according to sets of ordinary differential
equations that model the electrical properties of neuronal cells. This neuronal inference influences the plasticity
incoming/outgoing synaptic connections i.e., inference drives spike-timing-dependent plasticity. Obviously, the
resistance values of the neuromorphic chip’s synapses, implemented as memristors [183, 330], affect the
effectiveness of each LIF’s inference; thus, capturing the inference and learning aspects of MILS.
One way to conceptualize the morphogenetic aspect of MILS in neuromorphic computing is to consider the synaptic
connectivity patterns that emerge over time. Specifically, if the model employs a form of local plasticity, e.g., a form
of synapse-dependent long-term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD) (see supplementary material for a review
of key plasticity alternatives), then, as two sets of connected neurons evolve a sparse connectivity structure
emerges [51]. Specifically, pre-synaptic neurons that rarely fire in correlation with the spike emission behavior of
post-synaptic specializations become disconnected. Since synaptic values are naturally bound to a non-negative
40
Preprint
range — due to the properties of the hardware — once a synapse has decayed sufficiently, it is effectively “pruned
away”. Thus, from the perspective of (synaptic) selection and MILS, a neuromorphic system comprising biophysical
LIFs, and local synaptic plasticity, performs a simple kind of morphogenesis, specifically the elimination of
redundant synapses. One open question is how the other side of neural morphogenesis, i.e., synaptogenesis and
neurogenesis, is instantiated. However, self-replication is still missing in this account: an element that might be
fruitful to consider when designing the next generation of neuromorphic mortal computers.
Despite their promise as mortal computers, neuromorphic systems still do not qualify as base-level MCs, because
they do not specify base-level imperatives or homeostatic regulation that would drive the processing to assure
persistence. Nevertheless, given how close neuromorphic systems are to our definition overall, e.g., instantiating
parts of MILS, specification of both software and hardware/substrate, and a design that is crucially morphic, we
may be able to modify the information processing of LIF systems to be homeostatic. The interaction of the morphic
structure offered with neuromimetic schemes, such as predictive coding and forward-only learning [31, 254, 247]
(see supplementary material for details), could provide viable pathways to constructing in silico neural-based
mortal computers that navigate their environments and forage for resources to charge their neuromorphic
batteries.
The Body-Niche Problem for Mortal Computation. As we have established throughout this work, a mortal
computer needs to distinguish itself from its environment while coupling to it in order to persist. Interestingly, much
as animals have adapted cognitive functions that are suitable for their particular niches [34] — e.g., the insect
boatman that breathes underwater by trapping air bubbles using the tiny hairs in its abdomen [103] — mortal
computers will likely exhibit similar diversity. The algorithmic processes implemented by their physical substrates
would constitute the “life cycle”, the setting in which it is deployed would constitute its “niche”, and its identity
would consist of its internal states (their dynamics and relationships, the processes that govern the regulation of
life-sustaining dynamics and variable measurements), and its structural boundary would be provided through its
Markov blanket. In terms of the niche, the framework of mortal computing hints at a re-framing of the machine
intelligence evaluation paradigm: we should be crafting benchmark environments that model resources and
evaluate if the agent is able to persist. This is where the free energy formalism, and active inference, offers the
greatest promise. If we couple this with designing bodily/morphological systems grounded in real-world principles
and dynamics, we might be able to make substantive advances in the design of mortal computers. Additionally, the
careful design of the right base-level inductive biases (priors) will be necessary given that successful organisms are
the product of a selection history, when viewed through autopoietic enactivist and life-mind continuity lenses.
Among the many problems that researchers in biomimetics and bionics engage with will be how MCs incorporate
elements of their niches into an ongoing quest to preserve their internal functional and structural integrity, i.e.,
how will such systems incorporate the self-orchestrated elements of their Markov blankets and bodily components
as well as environmental elements to resist the constant threat of thermodynamic disintegration. The emphasis on
a system’s environment requires a thorough consideration of both the substrate and niche in which MCs will be
instantiated. These aspects will need to be foregrounded; this is a natural consequence of mortal computing’s
appeal to autopoietic enactivism, embodiment and basal cognition, and the good regulator theorem and law of
requisite variety. Potentially, there may be practical difficulties for biomimetics and bionics research efforts to
surmount; depending on the choice of substrate and niche – as mentioned, despite their promise, organoids,
neuromorphic/photonic platforms, and robots are not readily nor widely accessible or affordable. The same issue,
though to a lesser degree, would plague access to various real-world environments. The physical, real-world
resource availability constraints inherent to this problem will need to be addressed and solutions will not likely
come easy.
To address access to real-world hardware/substrate, which can be prohibitively costly, a possible way to catalyze
research and development in mortal computing — and to democratize it — might be the construction of simulated
or virtual morphologies. For example, in service of crafting complex MCs it might be useful to consider designing
subsystems such as digital endocrine (and its biochemical effects) or nervous systems, which are integrated with
soft robotics. This means the design of body emulators will need to consider complexity and fidelity depending on
the target environment to be navigated, or indeed constructed. Consequently, the separation between the
computational intelligence and the system in which they are embedded becomes blurred. One might argue that
we should then first build better exoskeletons/bio-cybernetical body systems before we deal with the intelligence
per se. Nevertheless, the foundations of mortal computing provide a readily available counterpoint: intelligent
processing is inexorably intertwined with the body/morphology; again, this is the central thrust of the embodiment
thesis and the premise of basal cognition. It will likely be the joint, mutually informed development of the
computational cognitive processes, the sensorimotor systems, and the self-regulatory systems that will result in
the long-sought after AGI.
41
Preprint
The same solution will also apply to environments, although, fortunately, there is a much longer tradition in
machine intelligence research of simulating and abstracting such environments, i.e., as in reinforcement learning
[239, 203], thus providing some viable starting points for setting up body-niche setups. In the domain of
(neuro)robotics [79], viable tools have emerged over the past years [115, 366, 226], offering improved physics
engines for simulating real-world robotic systems and some of the task environments in which they would operate.
With respect to neuromorphic substrates, simulators of neuromorphic chips [196, 217] and emulator kits, e.g., the
RISP neuro-processor [282, 281, 130], have recently emerged; offering an alternative to expensive, non-mainstream
hardware. However, while digital emulation might prove to be an invaluable solution, even serving as a force behind
the rapid prototyping of early mortal computers, there is always a prescient gap between the fidelity and realism
of a particular simulation and the real-world niche that it attempts to emulate, i.e., the “sim2real” problem [173].
One possible guide for designing useful simulated environments might lie in suggested forms of analysis and
experimental design in cognitive psychology. For example, in [353], four concrete steps are prescribed for studying
embodied cognitive agents: 1) specify a task (from a first-person perspective) for a perceiving-acting agent, 2)
explicate task-relevant resources available to the agent (spanning the agent’s world, body, and brain), 3) identify
how the agent could assemble/use these resources to accomplish the task, and 4) formulate a means of testing if
the agent is using the ensuing solutions based on its performance. Such a multi-step procedure readily provides a
clear, goal-directed process for crafting niches for evaluating the functionality of a simulated MC – a setup that
promotes problem solving based on the entity’s world as well as its morphology, i.e., what are the agent’s
affordances. This design process could be amended to further incorporate life-critical resources, such as simulated
temperature in particular regions of the environment or availability of material sustenance to prioritize metabolic
regulation through homeostatic/allostatic processing.
A.4 Biological Credit Assignment’s Interaction with Mortal Systems
From the perspective of our framing of mortal computing, we foresee the gradual rise in efforts in brain-inspired
computing and biomimetic credit assignment over the last few decades [165, 202, 242, 171, 300, 215, 263, 264,
259, 261, 298] to become even more important, especially in their generalization and application to spiking neural
networks [225]. One of the central goals of biomimetic credit assignment research is to develop mechanisms, or
“rules”, for adapting the synaptic parameters of neural systems; such mechanisms, ideally, could serve as viable
replacements for the core workhorse algorithm of DNNs today – backpropagation of errors (backprop) [221, 294].
In tackling this grand challenge, approaches generally draw inspiration from ideas/results in computational
neuroscience and cognitive science to build mechanisms that try to, among other criteria, adjust synaptic weight
values using only local information, in both space and time. Furthermore, these approaches require that the same
set of mathematical transformations or neural mechanisms be used to carry out both inference and learning;
unlike backprop, where the learning step uses mechanisms entirely different those used in inference, i.e.,
derivative operators to utilize reverse-mode differentiation) in a parallelized fashion. Generally, these approaches
embody one or more of the desired criteria but come with tradeoffs, such as being expensive to simulate.
However, several promising schemes have emerged from this line of inquiry including spike-timing-dependent
plasticity [225, 51], a form of Hebbian adaptation [165] that applies to biophysical models of neurons, modern
forms of contrastive Hebbian learning [301] as well as their spiking neuron variations [231], and forward-only and
forward-forward learning [170, 262, 201] and its generalization to the spike-level [255]. Directly relevant to the
free energy principle is that of predictive coding [288, 133, 259], including schemes that adhere to/derive similar
principles [215, 251, 265], which is a form of neuronal adaptation that learns a generative model by minimizing a
variational free energy functional [134] and is a mechanistic scheme that has completely embraced the
entanglement of inference and learning historically; [257] originally referred to predictive coding-like adaptation
as a form of entangled learning-and-inference.
Within the context of mortal computing, of the growing plethora of brain-inspired algorithms that have emerged
over the past several decades, we highlight predictive coding (PC), forward-forward learning (FFL), spike-timing-
dependent plasticity (STDP) as some of the initial viable candidate biomimetic credit assignment schemes for
satisfying the inference and learning aspects of the MILS property of mortal computing’s main definition.
42
Preprint
Figure 8: The spectrum of brain-motivated computing, ranging from conversion of deep artificial neural networks to a
chip/platform to brain-inspired computing and its mapping to a chip to mortal (homeostatic) computing and its direct,
entangled relationship with a particular chip/platform.
In terms of what is useful and amenable to integration into mortal computing design is:
• First, all three leverage a system’s computational architecture27 to carry out localized synaptic plasticity in
concert with iteratively adjusted neural activity dynamics, at relatively low simulation costs. For instance,
PC minimizes local prediction errors in a heterarchical neural message passing structure, FFL systems
optimize a set of functionals that contrast positive from negative activity produced by the neural
structure, and STDP produces correlational Hebbian updates based on pre- and post-synaptic activity for
any synapse within a neural circuit.
• Second, each can be shown to follow the gradient flow induced by a free energy functional; see [133, 134,
298] for details of PC does so, see [262] for details on how a recurrent predictive form FFL does this, and
see [43] for STDP’s approximate energy function.
Furthermore, PC, FFL, and STDP all (can) operate with fine-grained neuronal dynamics at the spike-train level,
facilitating their implementation in neuromoprhic and analog systems. STDP fundamentally inherently does this
given that it directly applies to spiking action potentials while PC and FFL can be made to do so; see [255] for details
related to PC, see [254] for details related to FFL.
While most current research studies related to these credit assignment schemes develop just the inference (I) and
learning (L) elements of mortal computing’s MILS, leaving selection of structure (S) largely untouched or
unaccounted for, we remark that some efforts have mixed schemes, such as STDP, with evolutionary processes
simulated with genetic algorithms. As a result, it would not be inconceivable to specify a morphogenetic alteration
process that applies to the computational architecture and software arrangement of neurons, although how this
would translate to structurally-adaptive and self-replication mechanisms in actual physical substrate, e.g.,
neuromorphic chips, that might use algorithms such STDP, FFL, or PC is not clear. Beyond the engineering difficulty
inherent to constructing “evolving physical substrates”, a good deal of work will need to be done to properly study
how schemes such as PC, FFL, and STDP interact with different silicon and possibly biophysical material structures,
such as xenobot or organoid constructs. Furthermore, despite standing on a growing body of work that has
demonstrated their promising generalization abilities and uniquely useful properties, all three schemes have their
issues/drawbacks and largely been tested and studied on amorphic software models that, if implemented, would
detrimentally complicate the design of effective mortal computers. Some of these notable issues include:
• STDP is a purely correlational learning scheme, requiring another complementary modulation process,
e.g., dopamine/reward signal triggered plasticity [184], to be coupled to it in order for it to carry out
predictive/action- oriented tasks, and it requires extremely careful tuning of its biophysical
hyperparameters to work well;
• PC can incur expensive iterative inference costs, requires feedback synapses of some form to facilitate
any meaningful form of message passing, and a poor design of its feedback structure can complicate
27 Note that this is not the same as a physical morphology.
43
Preprint
learning or result in instability [257, 264]; and
• FFL requires a meaningful and useful negative activity/data generating process, even for its non-recurrent,
non- structure committing form [170] – how such a process takes form in the context of complicated
spiking dynamics poses a significant challenge to overcome [262, 254].
Future work that might incorporate these schemes into physical systems will require addressing these problematic
concerns to develop solutions that might leverage the target substrate/morphology. Given that the above schemes
have largely been designed and evaluated in the context of amorphic models28, it will be of greatest importance
to craft their generalizations to specific morphologies (an organism vehicle or body) in the context of an
environment.
Despite the slower (as compared to backprop-centric deep learning research [298]) yet positive progress being
made in biomimetic credit assignment, and despite their viability for use in actual morphological computing
constructs as we argued above, these schemes would only serve as one possible tool or aspect in the design of a
mortal computing models. The Markov blanket formalism we developed in Section 4.2 might prove helpful in
setting the general, broad strokes as to the structure they need to be integrated with and a particular system-niche
choice, e.g., a neurorobotic quadruped with the “brain” controller implemented with hierarchically arranged set
of memristor crossbars (this is its body morphology) that must find energy charge stations in a warehouse (this is
its niche), will help to ground the experimental setup in a proper mortal computing context. In Figure 8, we present
several different approaches to examine how learning and inference interact with neuromorphic
substrate/hardware. Finally, it might be that the most promising pathway is to not map or adapt current
biomimetic credit assignment schemes to a physical substrate but to, instead, formulate completely novel,
substrate-specific learning/inference schemes that are grounded in whatever morphogenetic capabilities that may
be supported by or could be integrated into the hardware. This is depicted in the bottom row of Figure 8, i.e.,
“Mortal/Homeostatic Computation”. What such a class of biomimetic credit assignment processes would look like
is not straightforward. What is clear, however, is that they would be diverse and fundamentally dependent on the
body-niche context that they were developed for. In other words, the learning and inference mechanisms for a
cellular-like mortal computer moving along chemical concentrations, a bacterium-like agent or xenobot, would be
very different from an animal-like mortal computer, such as one in a complex neurorobot operating in mountainous
terrain.
A.5 A Sketch of a Minimal Model of Mortal Computing
Drawing inspiration from the minimal model of metabolism-based control from [111], a next step towards
instantiating viable forms of mortal computation would be to possibly craft minimal models of it. In particular, one
could begin by developing simulation models of base-level MCs, abstracting several desirable sensorimotor
functions. In this section, we construct a simple theoretical sketch of what such a minimal model/agent might look
like, demonstrating a rudimentary homeostatic regulatory process (based on energy level) and how such an
agent’s internal, Markov blanket (including its action/sensing/energy exchange), and external states could be
specified for simulation.
Mortal Predictive Coding: Energy-Aware Computation. Inspired by the physiological notion of hunger and its
relation to energy balance [213], we adapt the concept to a simple neuro-mimetic circuit, an instance of what we
label as “mortal predictive coding”. The homeostatic control process of its energy balance pertains to the amount
of energy taken in through nutrition needed for an organism to match the amount of energy it uses (to conduct
work). This gives rise to the concept of “appetite” which is biophysically regulated by two key hormones – grephlin,
which stimulates hunger and the intake of food/nutrients, and leptin, which signals satiety or fullness [250]. We
could vastly simplify these hormonal signifiers and relate them to a measurable energy quantity commonly found
in most robotic systems: “battery level” or “power level”.
Our computational organism (see Figure 9), which we label in this sketch as a “homeostatic predictive coding
circuit” (H-PCC), is characterized by the following three non-neural bodily components: 1) a bodily membrane that
governs the rate and quantity at which energy is absorbed by the system’s internal battery (this could be simply
28 With the exception of STDP, which was only later applied to amorphic constructs after emerging from the study of actual
biological neurons and how synapses adjusted themselves biochemically [51, 52].
44
Preprint
specified as an ordinary differential equation characterizing energy exchange between the H-PCC organism and its
world), 2) a battery sub-module that is wired to a set of system quality control states (a simple setup would be one
state per discretized power level of the battery), 3) a set of sensory nodes to perceive a nearby portion of the
system’s world (such as an ego-centric view of the pixels in a small region around the front of the body), and 4) a
set of actuators that facilitates the system’s movement (in a simplified environment, these could be fixed
movements in particular cardinal directions) as well as one that couples, or “plugs in”, the system to a charging
port, each associated with a particular cost that will drain the battery. Note that these elements provide a basic
description of the H-PCC’s Markov blanket and further characterize a core internal state, the battery state, that will
serve as the basis for a homeostatic regulation. In other words, the system will need to keep the battery sufficiently
charged in order to compensate for the energy costs of its actions. A base/non-neural homeostatic mechanism
would further be implemented to possibly drain any of the system’s energy stores so as to prioritize keeping the
battery’s level above a minimum threshold value).
Figure 9: A depiction of the theoretical example of the homeostatic predictive coding circuit (H-PCC).
With respect to its internal states, each node or cell in the neural portion of the system would be assigned a
particular physical type. For instance, each node is a multi-compartment neuron with at least one portion
dedicated to maintaining the neuron’s current temporal state such as its voltage membrane potential, expanded
to account for a particular physical area/volume, and another dedicated to receiving a modulatory input from a
projection of the battery module’s control states. Some cells, closer to the H-PPC’s bodily actuators, would be
wired directly to output commands. Each neural cell is further conditioned by the agent’s previously chosen action
𝑎(𝑡−1) . Learning would be conducted within the framework of spiking predictive coding [255] (note that
morphogenesis could take the form of a synaptic generation, such as synaptogenesis, in tandem with a synaptic
pruning algorithm). The H-PCC’s environment, or external states, would contain several battery charging ports that
this system may couple to, but only for a finite amount of recharge over a finite time duration, and the agent’s
goal will be to keep itself charged over a far longer time-horizon. A specification will be needed for the
thermodynamics of how energy is utilized by the agent’s bodily actuators to perform work as well as how energy
leaves the body to the niche and becomes a heat-like quantity.
The H-PCC must optimize its variational free energy ℱ(𝑍,𝑏) where Z is the set of battery control states
{𝑧 ,𝑧 ,…,𝑧 } and b is the negative of the battery reading (lower is better). One would then likely decompose
1 2 𝐵
ℱ(𝑍,𝑏) into a perceptual free energy term, e.g., full hierarchical Gaussian log likelihood, and a heavily weighted
battery term. If the battery term b reaches/tends to 0, the H-PCC “dies”. The H-PCC continues to maintain its
homeostasis with respect to b so long as it minimizes its free energy, finding states of the world where b is high.
Finally, in our theoretical sketch, one could envision designing planning schemes based on rolling out possible
futures given that neural regions are conditioned on previous decisions – this would induce more sophisticated
action sequences that possibly lead to behavior that finds portions of the environment with reliable charging ports
to plug into, seeking favorable higher battery states.
45
Figure 10: A visual depiction of two different ways that computation is carried out in E. Coli cell (our figure is inspired by the
ones in [111]) – the top model presents a cell where its sensorimotor pathways are modulated by its internal homeostatic
process(es) and its bodily actuator (its flagellum) is further directly driven by its metabolism, a metabolism (homeostasis)
dependent/based cell. The bottom cell model depicts the traditional/classical model of E. Coli as a metabolism (homeostasis)
independent system, i.e., its movement/actuator are purely reactive and driven by sensory information only. Note this cell
model could be considered to be a possible instantiation of a mortal computer, i.e., its body consists of the cell membrane,
the flagellum, and the transmembrane receptors), hence our use of the label “homeostasis” which is motivated by the fact
that homeostasis regulates metabolic processes/pathways and could be argued to a core driver of a “living agent’s” actions.
A.6 Homeostatic/Metabolic Dependency: A Chemotaxis Example
In the biophysics section, the main paper established as part of its characterization of a mortal computer that
such a system would implement sensorimotor control sub-systems that are dependent in various ways on its
regulatory sub-systems. This type of dependency is inspired and motivated by work on metabolic processing in
biology, particularly the strain of work that has advanced the concept of metabolic (metabolism) dependency.
Concretely, metabolism dependency is the driving force behind a cell’s motility, or its independent motion
carried out due to metabolic energy, such as that of the well-studied unicellular entity known as Escherichia coli
(E. coli). A bacterium, e.g., E. coli, implements a strategy for moving up (up-gradient) or down (down-gradient)
an attracting substance concentration gradient by rotating its flagella in one of two directions. If the cell rotates
its flagella counterclockwise, it will exhibit a directed motion (labeled as “running”), whereas if it rotates its
flagella clockwise, it will exhibit (rotational) motion (referred to as “tumbling”) [349]. E. coli, which internally
compares current and past concentrations of attractants, runs if an attractant’s concentration is increasing and
tumbles otherwise, i.e., this is also known as the process of “adaptive gradient climbing”. Alternatively, the
bacterium combines tumbling with running to produce a random walk until certain (chemical) concentrations
are high enough such that, eventually, tumbling becomes the dominant motion (allowing it to remain in place),
gradually phasing out the running action, i.e., the process of “selective-stopping” [112].
Historically, studies of the chemotaxis, or movement of cells/organisms in the direction of the gradient of
increasing/decreasing concentrations of a substance, of bacteria, such as the running and tumbling of the E. coli
cell described above, has held the prevailing view that the cell’s short-term activity is independent of
metabolism, i.e., it is metabolism-independent [10]. More specifically, the chemotaxis of a bacterial organism is
not influenced by its current metabolic state and only influenced by its environment (specifically, it is only
responsive to the concentration of attraction chemicals [237, 349]) – a cell’s movement is not driven by the
effect of the (chemical) attractant upon its metabolism but exclusively by the way that attractants
stimulate/excite its transmembrane sensors. In essence, although the organism’s sensors, actuators, and
transduction processes are the product of its metabolism, they are not modulated or effected by it. In contrast,
an alternative to this view is that of metabolism-dependent chemotaxis [88, 324, 12], which has begun to re-
Preprint
emerge and posits that metabolism itself has an ongoing influence on the cell’s behavior and is key driver behind
its adaptability [111]. In other words, metabolic processing centrally affects the organism’s contextualized,
integrative evaluations of its environment – simply stated, the cells are capable of modifying themselves in
response to environmental changes. See Figure 10 for a generalized visual depiction chemotaxis from the point-
of-view of metabolic independence versus dependence. In addition, evidence in support of (dominant)
metabolism-dependent behavior has been steadily growing for a variety of bacteria species [188, 13, 158, 299],
including E. coli itself [367, 325]. Beyond challenging long-standing results and long-held assumptions in the
biological study of bacteria and unicellular organisms [33, 267, 156], metabolic dependent processing has been
increasingly argued to be a definite modulator of, and even key driver the evolutionary process behind,
behavioral and strategic processes that could underpin basal cognition [224].
Notably, [111] introduced a version of metabolic dependency in chemotaxis that they labeled as metabolism-
based chemotaxis. Unlike its metabolism-sensitive predecessor (where flagellar rotation is coupled with /
influenced by metabolic processing), metabolism-based chemotaxis claims that metabolism plays a central role
in directly modulating the cell’s behavior itself. [111] presented a minimal computational model of metabolism-
based chemotaxis and demonstrated, via simulation, a wide range of effects that aligned with the expected
behavioral patterns of real E. coli cells. From this paper’s perspective, the minimal model of [111] could serve
as an inspiring prototype template for mortal computation itself.
While the minimal metabolism model did not account for specific biological mechanisms, it offered a key proof-
of-concept that a simple abstraction/model of metabolism could support a wide and varied range of observed
aspects of chemotactic functionality. This has sparked a reconsideration of bacterial organisms as exclusively
stimulus-driven systems [12, 244, 152] – such living systems should be treated as ones where their
attractants/repellents should be framed in terms of metabolism, influenced by the cell’s history and internal
organization (metabolic rates, active/non-active metabolic pathways, etc.). For example, the process theory of
active inference [140] has been applied to implement action-oriented dynamical models [32] of phototaxis
[187]. In general, metabolism dependent and metabolism-based behavior in living systems places metabolic
drive as the central impetus behind an organism’s interaction with its niche. This metabolic drive and
environmental factors co-exist in the picture of organism adaptation and behavior meaning that life, in general,
has a metabolic side to it [59]. Note that, in the main paper, we generalized the concept of metabolic
dependency to notions including homeostatic and allostatic dependency in order to emphasize different levels
of modulation on an organizationally closed system’s perception and decision-making.
47