ORIGINALRESEARCH
published:14April2021
doi:10.3389/fncom.2021.590019
A Computational Framework for
Controlling the Self-Restorative Brain
Based on the Free Energy and
Degeneracy Principles
Hae-JeongPark1,2,3,4,5*†andJiyoungKang1,2*†
1CenterforSystemsandTranslationalBrainScience,InstituteofHumanComplexityandSystemsScience,YonseiUniversity,
Seoul,SouthKorea,2DepartmentofNuclearMedicine,YonseiUniversityCollegeofMedicine,Seoul,SouthKorea,
3DepartmentofPsychiatry,YonseiUniversityCollegeofMedicine,Seoul,SouthKorea,4BrainKorea21Project,Graduate
SchoolofMedicalScience,YonseiUniversityCollegeofMedicine,Seoul,SouthKorea,5DepartmentofCognitiveScience,
YonseiUniversity,Seoul,SouthKorea
Thebrainisanon-lineardynamicalsystemwithaself-restorationprocess,whichprotects
itself from external damage but is often a bottleneck for clinical treatment. To treat
the brain to induce the desired functionality, formulation of a self-restoration process
is necessary for optimal brain control. This study proposes a computational model for
Editedby:
thebrain’sself-restorationprocessfollowingthefree-energyanddegeneracyprinciples.
TatyanaSharpee,
SalkInstituteforBiologicalStudies, Based on this model, a computational framework for brain control is established. We
UnitedStates
positedthatthepre-treatmentbraincircuithaslongbeenconfiguredinresponsetothe
Reviewedby:
environmental(theotherneuralpopulations’)demandsonthecircuit.Sincethedemands
FeiHe,
CoventryUniversity,UnitedKingdom persistevenaftertreatment,thetreatedcircuit’sresponsetothedemandmaygradually
SunghoHong, approximate the pre-treatment functionality. In this framework, an energy landscape
OkinawaInstituteofScienceand
of regional activities, estimated from resting-state endogenous activities by a pairwise
TechnologyGraduate
University,Japan maximum entropy model, is used to represent the pre-treatment functionality. The
AdeelRazi,
approximationofthepre-treatmentfunctionalityoccursviareconfigurationofinteractions
MonashUniversity,Australia
amongneuralpopulationswithinthetreatedcircuit.Toestablishthecurrentframework’s
*Correspondence:
Hae-JeongPark construct validity, we conducted various simulations. The simulations suggested that
parkhj@yonsei.ac.kr brain control should include the self-restoration process, without which the treatment
JiyoungKang
was not optimal. We also presented simulations for optimizing repetitive treatments
jykang@yuhs.ac
and optimal timing of the treatment. These results suggest a plausibility of the current
†Theseauthorshavecontributed
frameworkincontrollingthenon-lineardynamicalbrainwithaself-restorationprocess.
equallytothiswork
Keywords: free energy principle, resting state, brain dynamics, energy landscape, self-restoration, maximum
Received:31July2020
entropymodel,degeneracy
Accepted:18March2021
Published:14April2021
Citation: INTRODUCTION
ParkH-JandKangJ(2021)A
ComputationalFrameworkfor The goal of clinical treatment for the brain is to modify the brain circuit to yield a desirable
ControllingtheSelf-RestorativeBrain
brainfunction.Sincethebrainisacomplexnon-lineardynamicsystem,clinicaltreatmentcanbe
BasedontheFreeEnergyand
consideredacontrolproblem.Fortheclinicaltreatmenttothehumanbrain,variousmethodshave
DegeneracyPrinciples.
Front.Comput.Neurosci.15:590019. beendeveloped,suchasthermalablationwiththehighintensityfocusedultrasound(Parketal.,
doi:10.3389/fncom.2021.590019 2017),deepbrainstimulation(DBS)(Parketal.,2015),vagusnervestimulation(Yuetal.,2018),
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 1 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
andtranscranialmagneticstimulation(TMS)(Parketal.,2013; In this respect, the brain’s self-restoration process may well
Kar, 2019) as well as conventional medications and traditional be included as an essential part of the computational model of
surgical operations (Schreglmann et al., 2018). Despite the braincontrol.Despitethecriticalityofthebrain’sself-restoration
remarkable advancement of these therapeutic techniques, the process,researchthathasaself-restorationprocessinthecontrol
optimal control of the brain by treatments has many practical problemishardlyfound.Thismaybepartlyattributabletothe
challengesduetothecomplexityofthebrainandethicalissues. difficulty in defining the driving force of the self-restoration
Since various experiments are not allowed in the human brain, process and its mathematical formulation. In contrast to the
establishingoptimalcontrolproceduresforthebrainisveryslow microscopic level, where the mechanism of the self-recovery
and limited. Therefore, optimal brain control remains mostly process has actively been researched in terms of neurogenesis
theoreticalandbasedoncomputationalmodels. (e.g., Mattson, 2008), a systematic understanding of the self-
The brain control studies with computational models have restoration process at the macroscopic level is still lacking. Are
been conducted mainly in two approaches: characterization there any principles that we may refer to formulate the brain’s
of the network controllability and prediction of the network self-restorationprocessatthemacroscopiclevel?
behavior based on the state dynamic equation of the brain. To In the current study, as an extension of our previous study
characterize the brain network, the controllability of a brain (Kangetal.,2021),weproposeacomputationalframework for
systemhasbeenevaluatedinthegraph-theoreticperspective(Liu controllingtheself-restorativebrainbyformulatingthedriving
et al., 2011; Gu et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017; Cornblath et al., force of self-restoration based on the free-energy principle
2019;Leeetal.,2019;Stisoetal.,2019;Karreretal.,2020).This (Friston et al., 2006; Friston, 2010) and the degeneracy nature
approachoptimizesinputsignalstoincreaseordecreaseactivity of a non-linear complex system (Glassman, 1987). According
atsomebrainnetworknodestoinducethedesiredbrainactivity to the free-energy principle, the brain acts based on a model
at all the brain nodes. The other approach is to predict a brain established to minimize long-term average surprise from the
system’sbehaviorbyalteringsomenodesoredgesofthebrain.In external environment (Friston et al., 2006; Friston, 2010). The
this approach, the optimal control is determined by evaluating brain network and its behavior can be considered a result of
the outcome after removing nodes or edges or changing the long-term adjustment to meet environmental demands (Park
system’sparametersinthevirtualbrainmodel(Falconetal.,2016; and Friston, 2013). For a neural population at any level of the
Jirsa et al., 2017; Proix et al., 2017; An et al., 2019; Olmi et al., information hierarchy, neural populations that send signals to
2019). Those two types of computational approaches on brain andreceivesignalsfromtheneuralpopulationareenvironment
control have primarily focused on the immediate changes in to the neural population. For a neural circuit of the brain,
thebrainnetwork’sactivityorfunction.Thosestudies,however, the circuit’s environment can involve lower-level and higher-
did not consider the fact that the brain has self-restorative levelneuralpopulations,affectingtheneuralcircuitbysensation
plasticity, making the system resilient to external treatments fromthelower-levelneuralpopulationsandregulationfromthe
orperturbations. higher-level neural populations (Friston, 2008). The long-term
Self-restoration capacity in the brain has been found demands of the environment to a neural circuit or system can
after damage or stress via neural, molecular, and hormonal be represented by the statistics of bottom-up (from the lower-
mechanisms (Russo et al., 2012; King, 2016; Murrough and level neural populations) and top-down (from the higher-level
Russo, 2019). At the macroscopic level, the self-restoration neuralpopulations)signals.Althoughanyclinicaltreatmentmay
processtowardtheinitialfunctionalityhaswidelybeenreported alteraneuralcircuit,thecircuit’senvironmentaldemandspersist
inclinicalneuroscience,fore.g.,functionalrecoveryafterstroke anddonotchangerapidlyevenafteralterationinthecircuitry.
(MurphyandCorbett,2009;MaloneandFelling,2020),recovery Since the functionality before treatment has been developed as
of the language capacity (Saur et al., 2006), recovery of the an optimal solution to environmental demands, we posit that
visionaftersurgery(Mikellidouetal.,2019).Thisself-restorative thealteredneuralcircuitgraduallyapproximatesthepretreated
propertyofthebrainisadvantageousinprotectingthebrainafter neural circuit’s functionality while adjusting itself to meet the
various external attacks (Glassman, 1987). In terms of clinical environmentaldemandsaftertreatment.
treatment, however, this self-restoration process is a bottleneck In this framework, the pre-treatment state the brain circuit
as it tends to recover the initial abnormal functionality, acting tendstorecoverisnotthesamecircuit,butthefunctionalitythat
against the aim of any treatment. Examples of this anti- thecircuithasestablishedtosatisfytheexternaldemands.Inmost
treatmentactioncanbefoundwithneurologicalorantipsychotic cases, the functionality for ongoing environmental demands
medication(Abbott,2010)showingdrugresistanceinmostbrain has to be approximated via reallocation of the reduced circuit
disease such as schizophrenia (Potkin et al., 2020), depression resources after treatment (e.g., after removing a node of the
(Bennabi et al., 2019), Parkinson’s diseases (Vorovenci et al., circuit). In this respect, the recovery of functionality via an
2016), and epilepsy (Lee et al., 2017). Goellner et al. (2013) altered circuit can be referred to as a well-known property of
showed that the late seizure recurrence after temporal lobe the complex biological system called “degeneracy” (Glassman,
epilepsy surgery was as much as 48.9%. Despite the anatomical 1987;EdelmanandGally,2001).Degeneracyofasystemindicates
alterationbyresection,thetreatedbrains,initiallyshowingfreeor a function (or behavior) can be implemented with different
reductionofabnormalfunction(seizurebehavior)aftersurgical network configurations (Friston and Price, 2003). Degeneracy
dissection,returnedtotheinitialstateofabnormalfunctionality oftheself-reorganizingbiologicalsystemisessentialtomanage
inacertainperiodaftertreatment. andprotectitsfunctionalityfromdamage(MarderandGoaillard,
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 2 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
2006;Marderetal.,2017).Thisstudyisbasedonthedegeneracy modulatetheinputandoutputrelationship,i.e.,thefunctionality
principle as it focuses on the restoration of the pre-treatment ofthebrain.
functionality,notthepre-treatmentcircuit. We used the term “optimal brain control” in consideration
The final component of the current framework for brain of clinical treatment settings that call for optimal selection of
controlistodefinethepre-treatmentfunctionalityofthebrain. treatment target gray matter regions (nodes) or white matter
Asarepresentationofthebrain’sfunctionality,weusedthenon- regions (edges) and treatment strength, within limited access
linear dynamics of regional activity while the brain is at rest to the brain circuit at a time. For example, the circuit that
(called resting-state). A strong relationship exists between the generates epileptic seizures is the source system, and the goal
resting-stateconnectivity(ordistributedpatternsofendogenous system is a healthy functioning state without a seizure. The
activity)withtask-relatedbrainactivationorconnectivity(Biswal treatment target can be multiple nodes in the medication.
et al., 1995; Smith et al., 2009; Cole et al., 2014, 2016; Krienen For example, lorazepam enhances the effect of the inhibitory
et al., 2014; Park et al., 2014; Yeo et al., 2015; Tavor et al., neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors
2016; Jung et al., 2018). Fox and Raichle (2007) argued that distributedinmultiplebrainareas.Thetargetcanbeasinglenode
resting-state connectivity might serve as a potential scaffold by temporal lobectomy, which removes a part of the anterior
that supports diverse configurations subserving the functional temporal lobe. Callosotomy, which dissects interhemispheric
elementsofagiventask(FoxandRaichle,2007).Inthisrespect,a fibers,isanexampleoftargetingedgesinthenetwork.
stabilizedbrainnetwork’sresting-statedynamicswereconsidered The current paper is composed in the following order. It
to summarize the environmental demands established by long- beginswithamathematicaldescriptionofpairwiseMEMandits
terminteractionswiththeenvironment. energylandscapeanalysis.Wethenformulatedaself-restoration
The resting-state brain network may behave as a non-linear process and optimal control in a non-linear dynamical system.
dynamical system with its microstate (defined by distributed Based on this formulation, we present diverse simulations to
regionalactivitypattern)transitioningovertheenergylandscape illustrate the self-restoration process and show the effect of
ofmultistablemicrostates(attractors)(Freyeretal.,2011,2012; modeling the self-restoration process in brain control. We also
Rabinovich and Varona, 2011; Deco and Jirsa, 2012; Kelso, presentsimulationsforoptimizingrepetitivetreatmentstrategy
2012; Cabral et al., 2014; Tognoli and Kelso, 2014; Deco et al., and its timing in consideration of the clinical practice, where
2015; Breakspear, 2017). The non-linear dynamics of the brain any treatment is highly restricted. Using these simulations, we
circuit can be modeled in terms of non-linear interactions expectedtoshowtheconstructvalidityofthecurrentframework
amongnodesinthenetworkusingapairwisemaximumentropy inthebrain’scontrol.
model (MEM) (Watanabe et al., 2013, 2014a,b,c; Kang et al.,
2017, 2019; Ezaki et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2018). From the BACKGROUND
pairwise MEM, we can infer the probability distribution of
Dynamic Properties of the Brain Using
each microstate (an activation pattern), the microstates’ energy
landscape. In the energy landscape, a microstate’s energy is Pairwise Maximum Entropy Model
the minus (scaled) log of its probability of occurrence. In this Todefinethedynamicpropertiesofasystem,weusedtheenergy
model, the microstate dynamics (represented in microstates’ landscapeofmicrostateestablishedonpairwiseMEM.Here,we
energy landscape) are emergent from the underlying complex brieflyexplainthepairwiseMEMmodel.Thedetailsforderiving
network(orcircuitry).Theyareconsideredtorepresentthegross the MEM of the resting-state functional magnetic resonance
functionalityofabrain. imaging(rsfMRI)canbefoundelsewhere(Watanabeetal.,2013,
In summary, our proposal for the recovery process can be 2014a;Kangetal.,2017,2019).
explained by the free energy principle to satisfy environmental InthepairwiseMEMmodelofabrainwithNregions,abrain
demands by reconfiguring the remained resources after stateV ,isdefinedasanN-dimensionalbinaryvector;
k
treatmentaccordingtothedegeneracyprincipleofthecomplex
brain. Utilizing this self-restoration model, we could develop a V =(σ ,...,σ ), (1)
k 1 N
strategy to identify the optimal treatment target region (nodes
oredgesinthenetwork)andtheamountoftreatmentstrength whereσ =1foranactivatedstateandσ =0foraninactivated
i i
within a source system to be treated (e.g., a disease system) to stateatregioni.Thus,totally2N statesexist.AnenergyE(V )of
k
inducemicrostatedynamicsofthedesiredgoalsystem(ahealthy astateV isdefinedas
k
system).Wecallthisprocedureoptimalbraincontrolthroughout
thepaper.Intheconventionalcontroltheoryproblems,control N N−1 N
signals are inputs to the system to achieve the desired system’s E(V )=− Hσ (V )− J σ (V )σ (V ), (2)
k X i i k X X ij i k j k
state without changing the system parameters. Meanwhile, i=1 i=1 j=i+1
the optimal brain control in this study refers to adjusting the
source system’s model parameters to approximate the desired where H and J are model parameters that represent weights
i ij
functionality of the goal system. In this study based on the for independent activation of region i and pairwise interaction
pairwise MEM, the model parameters include the sensitivity (coactivation) between regions i and j, respectively. For
of a brain region and interaction among brain regions, which simplicity,weusedA={H i ,J ij }| i=1,···,N,j=1,···,N toexpressallthe
indicate neurobiological connectivity or synaptic efficacy that modelparameters.Thesemodelparameterswereestimatedusing
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 3 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
the maximum likelihood estimation approach. For a detailed Thetreatmentatregionm(anodeoranedge,forsimplicity,
p
mathematicalreview,seeYehetal.(2010). wecallit“region”)isdenotedbychangingtheelementA inthe
m
The probability of a state V is given by the Boltzmann pretreatednetworkparametersApwith
k
distributionp(V ),
k
Atr ⇐A p +α (6)
m m
exp −E(V )
k
p(V )= (cid:0) (cid:1) . (3)
k 2N
exp −E V
whereαistheamountoftreatment.Thesystemparametersright
Pj=1 (cid:0) (cid:0) j (cid:1)(cid:1) aftertreatmentcanbeexpressedasAt = Atr,A p ,wherem
n m \mo
To analyze the energy landscape of state dynamics, we defined and\mrepresentthetreatedanduntreatedregions,respectively
localminima(attractors,LM)andoccupationtimeratioofeach (Figure2D).mcanbemultiplenodesoredges.Inthistheoretical
localminimum(OCR(LM))asbelow. study,weassumedthatweknowhowtoachievethedesiredlevel
i
αandachievethedesiredparameterAtr.ThetreatedstateAtofa
m
LocalMinimum systemisthestartingpointoftherecoveryA r.
0
Alocalminimum(LM i )ofanenergylandscapeofasystemwith The system proceeds with its recovery to minimize the
parametersAisastatewithlowerenergythanitsneighborstates. functional distance between state dynamics before treatment
Neighborstatesaredefinedasstatesthatdifferfromeachother and recovery (Figure2B). When we decompose the network
byonlyoneelement(oneregion)oftheactivationstate. elements (nodes or edges) into recovery regions (strongly
connected neighbors of the treated node or edge), R , and
OccupationTimeRatio m
unchanged(weaklyorunconnected)regions,\R ,foratreated
m
OCR(LM i ): Occupation time ratio of LM i is the sum of region (node or edge) m with a treatment strength Atr, the
probabilities of all states in the basin region of LM i . The basin network state of the treated system just after treatment, m At =
region of LM i is the set of states that belong to the LM i . To {Atr,A p }, can be written as At = {At ,At }. The recovery
determine whether a state belongs to the LM, each element of m \m R m \R m
i then begins from At and the recovery regions R cooperate to
thestateisgraduallychangedalongtheenergygradientuntilit m
findanoptimalparametersetA∗ withinaconstrainedboundC
reachesoneofthelocalminima. toreturntothepre-treatmentst R a m teAp.Thisrecoveryprocesscan
Functional Distance Between Energy bewrittenasbelow:
Landscapes
T so o ur m ce e s a y s s u t r e e m t s h , e At fu an n d ct A io s n , a in l t d h i e st e a n n e c r e gy be la tw nd e s e c n ap t e h , e w t e a d rg e e fi t ne a d nd a A∗ R m =arg At R ′ m , m (cid:12) (cid:12) A i t R ′ n m(cid:12) (cid:12) ≤C D r(cid:16) Ap,At′ (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) At R ′ m (cid:17) (7)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
distancefunctionbetweenstatesintermsofdynamicproperties At′ ={At R ′ m ,At \R m },Ar = n A∗ R m ,At \R m o ,
(energylandscape)ofthetwosystems,governedbythesystem’s
networkparameters. whereD indicatesthedistancefunctionbetweenthestabilized
r
Tofocusonthefunctionaldistancebetweenmajorattractors state before treatment Ap and a plausible treatment solution
and their properties in the optimal treatment, we use a partial At′ byadjustingparametersAt′ intherecoveryregionR while
R m
Kullback–Leibler(KL)-divergencedefinedasfollows. m
keepingtheotherregion\R unchangedaftertreatmentAt.The
m
final recovered state Ar is composed of the optimal parameter
p V At
D (cid:0) At,As (cid:1) = X p (cid:0) V k(cid:12) At (cid:1) ln p (cid:0) (V k(cid:12) (cid:12)|As) (cid:1), (4) setwithintherecoveredregionsA∗ R m andtheunchangedregions
k∈R (cid:12) k ofthetreatedsystemAt \R
m
.Consideringthelimitedcapacityof
the biological change, we restricted maximum changes at the
whereRrepresentsasetofstatesthatbelongtobasinregionsof
recoveredregionsA∗ tobe<20%ofthoseofthepreviousstep.
R
majorattractors. Inthisstudy,wed m efinethepre-treatmentnetworkparameter
Wealsodefinedthesimilaritybetweentwosystemsintermsof Ap as a stable state after a long period of adaptation to the
system parameters by the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) environment. The optimally recovered state Ar can be a new
ofthetwosystems’parametervectors. pre-treatmentnetworkstateApforasubsequenttreatment,after
stabilization, e.g., A∞ r = Ap, where ∞ indicates a sufficient
RMSD(At,As)= At−As . (5) time for stabilization. Since the treated system may not revert
(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:12) completely to the pre-treatment network state by utilizing the
Recovery Process constrained resources of the recovery regions, Ap is a function
We modeled the recovery process based on three assumptions: oftrialnumberortime,movingtowardthetargetsystemovera
(1) recovery occurs by adjusting the network connectivity very long time scale. It should also be noted that a subsequent
(interactions) of the neighbors of the treated node or edge; (2) treatment can be applied to a system before the system is
adjustment of connectivity is performed within a range of its stabilized. We refer to treatment before stabilization as the
flexibility,and(3)recoveryoccurstomeettheexternaldemands, treatment at the transient network stage. We considered that
which were represented in the state dynamics of the pretreated the transient state does not satisfy the environment’s demands.
stabilizedsystem. In this case, the pre-treatment network parameter Ap was not
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 4 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
updatedwiththestaterightbeforetreatment,butinsteadreferred otherwords,Dindicatesadistancebetweenthesourcedynamics
totherecentstabilizedstate.WeutilizedfunctionaldistanceD to that emerge from the source system with a parameter As, and
r
generatesimilardynamicsinsteadofgeneratingsimilarnetwork the target dynamics that emerge from the goal system with a
parametersfortherecoveringandinitialsystems. parameterAg.Fromtheperspectiveofdegeneracy,theminimal
The reorganization is performed by modifying the network distancefunctionD inthedynamicsspacedoesnotnecessarily
parametersofneighborsR butwithinaplausiblerangeofeach indicate the closeness in the network parameter space. Even
m
parameter(connectivity)’sflexibility.InEq.7,wedenotethiswith though the two parameter sets, Ag and As, are distant in the
At′ ≤C,indicatingplausibleparameterswithinaconstrained parameterspace,theycanbecloseinthedynamicsspace.
(cid:12) R (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)bou m nd (cid:12) (cid:12) C. The amount of change at each node or edge in the
Strategy for Iterative Optimal Treatment
recovery regions can be defined proportionally to the treated
Optimal treatment is a recursive procedure between treatment
system’sbaseline(pretreatedstate).Forthetreatedregionm,we
planning by the operator and the restoration process in the
canassignlessflexibilitythanforneighborsorassigninflexibility
treatedsystem(Figures1,2C).Thetargetregion(nodeandedge)
(i.e.,nochange)aftertreatmentduringtherecoveryprocess.
to be treated and the strength of treatment was chosen using a
To measure effects of a treatment on brain dynamics, we
gridsearchalgorithminthisstudy.Inpractice,thetreatmentto
define a recovery capacity as the difference between functional
distance (partial KL divergence) of the treated state At and thesystemwasperformedbyalteringtheMEMparameterA i (an
pretreated state Ap, D Ap,At , and the functional distance activityofaregionH i orapairwiseinteractionJ ij )byanamount
betweentherecoveredst (cid:0) ateAra (cid:1) ndpretreatedstateAp,D p,Ar ofα.Weassumedthatonlyneighboringnodesandedgesofthe
(cid:0) (cid:1) treated node participate in the recovery process to return the
asfollows,
brain dynamics to the pre-treatment state (Figures1B,C). The
Recoverycapacity=△D=D Ap,At −D Ap,Ar . treatment strength induces changes in the energy landscape in
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) a non-linear manner (Figure2A). When a node is altered (i.e.,
Optimal Control H i ischanged),edgesthatarestronglyconnectedwiththenode
Aself-restorativesystemAs isdecomposedintotheregionthat (Figure1B) undergo self-restoration steps, gradually changing
requirestreatmentmandtheunaffected(untreated)region\m theenergylandscape(Figure2B).Whenanedgeistreated(i.e.,J ij
and is represented as As = {As ,As }. When a target system isselectedfortreatment),twonodesthatareconnectedwiththe
m \m
Ag is given as the goal to achieve for a source system As, the treatededgeandthestronglyconnectededgesofthetwonodes
optimal treatment is to find a region m and its treatment level undergo self-restoration (Figure1C). A threshold (|J ij | ≥ 0.1)
At∗tominimizethedistancefunctionDbetweenthegoalsystem was used to determine strongly connected edges. If we applied
m
Ag and recovered system As′r that develops following the self- treatments multiple times, the energy landscape evolved as the
restoration process of the source system As in response to iterationoftreatmentandrestoration(Figure2C).
The restoration process is an optimization procedure with
the treatment. To differentiate this from the distance function
D between Ag and As′r, we use D+ to indicate the functional referencetothestablepre-treatmentstate(Figure2B)asshown
distance D between Ag and As. The optimal control is defined in Equation 7. When the restoration process is saturated (no
significant improvement in minimizing the functional distance
asbelow,
bychangingparameters),thesaturatednetworkbecomesanew
At∗ =argmin D+ Ag,As′ As′ (8) pre-treatment state for a new restoration step, i.e., A∞ r = Ap
m (cid:16) (cid:12)
(cid:12)
m′(cid:17)
(Figure2C).
=argmin D Ag,As′r A (cid:12) s′ , (9) ToimplementtherecoveryprocessinEquation7,weadopted
(cid:16) (cid:12) m′(cid:17)
(cid:12) thegradientascentmethod,whichisgenerallyusedtoestimate
As′ = As′ ,A (cid:12) s , the pairwise MEM model parameters from the experimental
n m′ \m′ o
data by maximizing the log-likelihood (Watanabe et al., 2013,
As′r = n As R ′∗ m′ ,As \ ′ R m′ o , 2014a;Kangetal.,2017,2019).Tomaximizethelog-likelihood,
At ={At∗,As }, modelparameters,H i andJ ij ,areupdatediterativelyaccordingto
m \m differencesbetweendata-drivenandmodel-drivenexpectations
where the recovered system
As′r
is achieved following a self-
ofactivationsandcoactivations,asshownbelow.
restoration process after changes in the neighbors R m′ of the
treatedregionm′,accordingtoEquation7.Theoptimalcontrol H i (t+1)←H i (t)+α g (cid:0) log hσ i i−log hσ i i A(cid:1) , (10)
is conducted by searching for the best solution to achieve the J ij (t+1)←J ij (t)+α g (cid:0) log (cid:10) σ i σ j (cid:11) −log (cid:10) σ i σ j (cid:11)A(cid:1) , (11)
goal system’s dynamics by adjusting the parameter
As′
in the
m′
treatedregionm′whilemaintainingtheotherparametersAs \m′ in where α g is a learning rate, hσ i i and σ i σ j are expectations
untreated regions m′ unchanged. The final treated system At is of activations and coactivations of the b (cid:10) rain (cid:11) regions evaluated
composedoftheoptimaltreatmentregionwithitsstrengthAt∗ using the empirical data. From the pairwise MEM parameter
m
andtheunaffectedparametersofthetreatedsystemAs . A, probability p(V |A) for each state V can be derived
\m k k
Note that the distance function D is defined in functional using Equation 3, based on which the expected activations
space (between energy landscapes), not in parameter space. In and coactivations of the brain regions are derived using the
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 5 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE1|Anillustrationofthebraincontrolforaself-restorativebrain.(A)Thestatedynamics(orbehaviors)ofasourcesystemandadesiredtargetsystem
emergefromthenetworksofthetwosystems.Thestatedynamicsofasystemisrepresentedintheenergylandscape,wherethelogoftheinverseprobabilityofeach
state(distributedbrainactivation)isdefinedasenergy.Thetreatmentonanetworknodeoredgeofthesourcesystemisdeterminedtogeneratedynamicsofthe
desiredtargetsystem.Restorationisassumedtooccurintheneighborsofthetreatednode(B)oredge(C).Optimalcontrolistherecursiveprocedureoftreatment
andrestorationstepstoachievethedesireddynamicsofthegoalsystem.
followingequation. transition state as the proportion of time relative to the time
for full recovery. In this case, we used a grid search method
2N to determine the optimal treatment time without waiting for
hσ i i A = X σ i (V k )p(V k |A), (12) full recovery, as well as the target region and its scale. In this
k=1 situation,wedenotethefunctionaldistanceD+ asafunctionof
2N treatmenttimingT.
σσ = σσ(V )p(V |A). (13)
(cid:10) i j (cid:11)A X k=1 i j k k At m ∗ =argmin D+ (cid:16) Ag,As′ (cid:12) (cid:12) As m ′ ′ ,T (cid:17) (16)
(cid:12)
If the dynamics of a pretreated system Ap follows the pairwise
MATERIALS AND METHODS
MEM (we assumed in this study), the expected activations
hσ i i and coactivations σ i σ j of sufficiently large samples from A Test System: the Subcortical Limbic
(cid:10) (cid:11)
thestabilizedsystemAp,equaltothemodel-drivenexpectations
Brain
of the activation hσ i i Ap and coactivation (cid:10) σ i σ j (cid:11)Ap of the brain As a test system for optimal control, we reused the MEM
regions.Then,arecoveryprocesscanbeexplainedasfollows:
for the subcortical human brain (Kang et al., 2017). Briefly,
the system consists of 15 subcortical regions of interests
H i (t+1)←H i (t)+α g
(cid:0)
log hσ i i Ap −log hσ i i Ar
(cid:1)
, (14)
(ROIs): the hippocampus (HIPP), amygdala (AMYG), caudate
J (t+1)←J (t)+α log σσ −log σσ , (15)
ij ij g (cid:0) (cid:10) i j (cid:11)Ap (cid:10) i j (cid:11)Ar(cid:1) (CAU), putamen (PUT), pallidum (PAL), thalamus (THL),
Ar = H i ,J ij | i=1,···,N,j=1,···,N nucleus accumbens (NACC) of the left (L), and right (R)
(cid:8) (cid:9)
hemispheres,andthebrainstem(BSTEM).TheMEMparameters
Therecoveryisproceededbyadjustingthenetworkparameters were estimated from the resting-state fMRI data of 470
ofneighbors(At )ofthetreatednodeoredgem. participants in the HCP database (Van Essen et al., 2012).
R
m
In general, a treatment is applied to a system when the The estimated parameters are presented in Figures3A,B. The
recovery process is saturated for a sufficient time after each subcortical-limbic system has highly symmetric interactions
treatment.However,wealsopresentedasimulationoftreatment acrosshemispheresandappearstobemodular.Wesortedlocal
in the transient state before full saturation. We denote the minima (LMs) with their occupation time ratios and selected
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 6 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE2|Dynamicsofenergylandscapes(statedynamics)bytreatmentinthenetworkparametersandbyself-restorationprocesses.(A)Differenttreatmentson
thenetworkaltertheenergylandscapeofthesystemnon-linearly.(B)Thebrainhasatendencytoreverttoitsinitialstatebeforetreatmentvianon-linearstate
transitions.(C)Optimaltreatmenttoinducedesiredbehaviors(dynamics)canbeachievedbyiterativetreatmentandself-restorationviaanoptimaladjustmentinthe
networkparameters.(D)Notationsforiterativeproceduresintheoptimalcontrolofthebrainareexplained.Ap,At,andArindicatesystem(network)parametersfor
thepretreatedstate,treatedstate,andself-recoverystate;At*:optimalstrengthofatreatednodeoredge(m);Ap :thepre-treatmentparametersofuntreatednode
m \m
oredge(\m);AR * m :optimalparameterswithintherecoveredregionsR m;A \ t Rm :parametersoftheunchangedregionsintherecoveryprocess.SeetheMethodsection
fordetails.
thefivetoplocalminimathathavethehighestoccupationtime connectivity to simulate a corpus callosotomy for epilepsy
ratios. Among 18 LMs, the five major LMs, i.e., LM1(8000), surgery. All of these simulations were conducted to show the
LM2(24769), LM3(32768), LM4(1), and LM5(25286), occupied effectsoftheself-restorationprocessandhowtotreatthesystem
83.5% of all possible states (Figure3E). The brain activation toachievethedesiredbehaviors.
patterns for the two major local minima are displayed in
Figure3F.Inthisstudy,wesetthissystemasagoalofthecontrol
Simulation 1: The System’s
for the virtual abnormal systems. By controlling the regional
activity parameter H and pairwise interaction parameter J Self-Restoration Process After Treatment
i ij
(node and edge of the MEM parameters) of a virtual abnormal To illustrate the self-restoration process, we presented a
system, the abnormal system is expected to be guided to have perturbationsimulationoftherightthalamus(RTHL)byadding
dynamicsofthisgoalsystem. 0.5toitsH parameter.Afterthisperturbation,theneighboring
i
edges connected to the node were gradually reconfigured to
Overview of Simulations generate state dynamics similar to those of the initial pre-
Weconductedsixsimulationexperimentstoshowtheconstruct treatment state (Figure4A). For a treatment that induced a
validityoftheproposedframework.Insimulation1,wepresent deviation of state dynamics from the pre-treatment state, the
an example to show the self-restoration process in the energy self-restoration procedure gradually moved the system toward
landscape of the brain network after treatment (or damage) in the pre-treatment state, which induced a shorter functional
a region. In simulation 2, we present the effects of treatment distance D (partial KL-divergence) between the recovering and
on nodes and edges according to the number of neighbors to pre-treatment states (Figure4B), and receded its parameters
showtheadvantageofmoreneighboringedgesintherestoration fromthoseofthepre-treatmentstate(Figures4B,C).Despitethe
process.Insimulation3,weshowtheneedforaself-restoration increasingdistanceintheparameterspace(RMSD,Figure4C),
process in the control model by comparing treatment effects thedistanceinthestatedynamicsfromthepre-treatmentstate
with and without considering the system’s self-restoration. In is reduced (D, Figure4B). This is an example of degeneracy,
simulation 4, we show the effects of repetitive treatment on whichreferstothephenomenonwheresimilarbehaviorscanbe
each node of a source system to induce the desired dynamics. formulatedusingdifferentnetworks.
In simulation 5, we further control the timing of subsequent Treatmentoftherightthalamuschangedtheenergylandscape
treatments before full recovery when treating a system. In significantly from that of the pre-treatment state (Figure4D);
simulation 6, we optimize the dissection of interhemispheric the OCR of LM1 increased from 28.8 to 40.0, and the OCR of
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 7 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE3|Thehumansubcortical-limbicsystemusedinthestudyasatestsystem.(A)MEMparametersofthebaselinesensitivityparameter(Hi)andpairwise
interactionparameters(Jij)aredisplayedasdiagonalandoff-diagonalelementsinthematrix.(B)Thesystemisdisplayedintheinteractiondiagram.Thepairwise
interactionisdisplayedfor|Jij|>0.12.Thethicknessofthelinesrepresentsthestrengthofthepairwiseinteractions.Thereddottedlinerepresentsnegativepairwise
interactions(Jij<0).RedandbluenodesrepresentROIsthatbelongtomodules1and2.ModifiedfromKangetal.(2017).(C)Nodedegreeofthesubcortical-limbic
systemunderathreshold|Jij|=0.1isshown.(D)Aschematicillustrationoftheenergylandscapeofthesubcortical-limbicsystemisdisplayed.(E)Theenergy
landscapeofthehumansubcorticalsystemisrepresentedintermsoflocalminima(LM)displayedincircles.ThesizesofcirclesforLMsreflecttheoccupationtime
ratios(OCR)ofLMs.TheOCRsofLMsaredisplayedinpercentiles.(F)Activationpatternscorrespondingtotwomajorlocalminima(LM),i.e.,LM1andLM2,are
displayed.Thesubcortical-limbicsystemincludesthehippocampus(HIPP,Hi),amygdala(AMYG,Am),caudate(CAU,Ca),putamen(PUT,Pu),pallidum(PAL,Pa),
thalamus(THL,Th),nucleusaccumbens(NACC,Ac),andbrainstem(BSTEM,Br).Redandbluecolorsrepresentactivatedandinactivatedregions,respectively.
LM2decreasedfrom29.02to18.9.Duringself-restoration,this (Figure5) and each edge (Figure6) one by one. The degree
asymmetricenergylandscape(betweenLM1andLM2)gradually of freedom was defined by the number of neighboring edges
recovered(Figure4D).Inthefinalstageoftheself-restoration, that participated in the self-restoration process. In the node’s
theOCRsofLM1andLM2were37.5and31.9,similartothose treatment, the neighboring edges were strongly (threshold
oftheinitialsystem.Fullrecoverywasnotachievedinthissystem (|J | ≥ 0.1) connected with the treated node (Figure1B). In
ij
as it utilized only the limited resources of neighboring edges. the treatment of an edge, neighboring nodes connected to
Figure4E shows the changes in the major two local minima the treated edge and strongly connected edges connected to
(LM1 and LM4) along with the treatment and transient states these neighboring nodes were considered to participate in the
in the recovery process. This suggests that the system recovers self-restorationprocess(Figure1C).
similarenergylandscapesafterrecovery. Figure5presentsthenode-specificrestorationprocessinthe
realsubcortical-limbicsystem.Nodeswithdiversenodedegrees
(Figure5B) have different recovery capacities (Figure5A) and
Simulation 2: Region-Specific
recovery curves (Figure5C). The finally recovered network
Self-Restoration Capacity parameters and energy landscapes differed from each other
To test the node- or edge-specific recovery capacity, we (Figures5C,D). The recovery capacity depended highly on the
evaluated the self-restoration process after treating each node number of neighbors (or node degrees); nodes with more
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 8 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE4|Explanationoftheself-restorationprocess.(A)MEMparameters(anddifferencesfromtheinitialsystem)attheinitial,treated(thetimepointn=0),
half-restored(n=18),andfullyrestored(n=36)statesaredisplayed.(B,C)Adistancecurve(partialKL-divergence)(B)andanRMSDcurveofJ(interaction
parameters)(C)fromthepre-treatmentstatearedisplayed.Despitetheincreasingdistanceinparameterspace,thedistanceofstatedynamicsfromthe
pre-treatmentstateisreducedinthefunctionalspace.(D)Schematicdiagramsforenergylandscapesofthepre-treatmentstate(Ap)andself-restoredstate(Ar)are
displayedalongthetimecourse.(E)Alterationsintheenergylandscapesfollowingtreatmentandduringtherestorationprocessareexplainedintermsofthetwo
majorlocalminimaLM1andLM2.Afterrestoration,theoccupationtimeratiosofLM1andLM2becomeclosertothoseofthepretreatedstate.
neighbors had a higher recovery capacity. In this case, the virtualsystembyaddingaGaussianrandomnoise∼N(0,0.1)to
node degree acted as a degree of freedom of the system. theparametersofthehumansubcortical-limbicsystempresented
This was also found in the treatment of edges shown in inFigure3.Weconsideredthevirtualsystemasasourcesystem
Figure6. In this case, the number of neighboring edges of andthehumansubcorticalsystemasagoalsystem(Figure7A).
the system again explained the recovery capacity. The edges For each node, the best strength of treatment (|α|) was
with a higher number of neighboring edges (size of neighbors identifiedusingagridsearchmethodamongasetofα,0.05,0.10,
R m in Figure6B) showed better restoration (Figure6C). For 0.15, ..., and 0.5. We selected the best treatment strength that
example, greater self-restoration occurred after treatment in minimizes the functional distance between the final restoration
the edge between R CAU and L THL compared to the stateandgoalstatebasedonEquations8,9.Figure7Bshowsthe
edge between L PAL and L NACC (Figure6D). The latter expected treatment effects without considering the restoration
utilizes adjustments of more edges than the former one in the process, while Figure7C shows the actual treatment results for
self-restoration(Figure6E). the self-restorative system. Discrepancies between the expected
andtreatmenteffectsoccurredwhentheself-restorationprocess
Simulation 3. Effects of the
wasnotconsidered.Incontrast,whentherecoveryprocesswas
Self-Restoration Process in Controlling the
considered,weobtainedincreasedtreatmenteffects(Figure7D),
Brain System withfunctionaldistancesfromthegoalsystemshorterthanthat
Wesimulatedtreatmentswithandwithoutconsideringtheself- oftreatmentswithoutconsideringthesystem’srecoveryprocess
restorativepropertiesofthesystem.Inthisstudy,wegenerateda (Figure7C).Optimalnodesdifferedaccordingtohowthenodes
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 9 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE5|Therecoverycapacityatthenodesofthesubcortical-limbicsystem.(A)RecoverycapacityDisshownforeachnode.(B)Thenodedegreeplaysas
degreesoffreedom,i.e.,numbersofadjustableparametersfortherecovery.(C)Forthethreerepresentativenodes(RHIPP,RTHR,andRNACC),recoverycurves
aredisplayedintermsofthefunctionaldistance(partialKLdivergence)betweentherestoringstateandthepre-treatmentstate.(D)Differencesbetweenparameters
oftherestoredandpre-treatmentstates,andschematicenergylandscapesatthefinalrestorationstatearedisplayed.TherestorationattheRTHLwasmost
successfulintermsofrecoveringtheenergylandscapeofthepretreatedstate.
werechosenwithorwithoutaself-restorativemodel.Whenwe inFigure7D,repetitivetreatmentswithasequenceofdifferent
determine the optimal node and its treatment strength to treat strengths (Figures8C,F) made the system closer to the desired
withoutconsideringtherecoveryprocess,anoptimaltreatment goal(Figure8B).Afterrepetitivetreatment,thetreatedsystem’s
targetwaschosenintheleftputamen(LPUT)withatreatment finalenergylandscapegetsclosertothatofthetargetgoalsystem
strength of 0.45 (Figure7B) but the optimal treatment did not (Figure8H).
effectivelychangethesystemtothedesiredgoalafterrestoration In Figure8E, the state change due to the second treatment
(Figures7C,E). When we consider the restoration’s effects, the suggests the non-linear nature of the treatment vs. the
best treatment was selected on BSTEM with−0.5 (Figure7D). behavioral response (dynamics). The optimal treatment was
For this treatment, functional distance from the desired state not always chosen to minimize the distance to the goal
decreased right after treatment, followed by an increase during system in the early stages of the time curves, as shown in
the restoration process (Figure7G). The final treatment effects the first treatment effect (Figure8E). Instead, the optimal
by considering the restorative process are better in this treatment made the system deviate from the desired goal
treatment than the treatment without considering restoration system but eventually get closer to the desired system than
(Figure7E). othertreatmentsthatareinitiallyeffectivebutfinallyineffective
(Figure8E).
Simulation 4. Repetitive Treatment at a
Single Node Simulation 5. Repetitive Treatment at a
In the clinic, most treatments are repetitive, particularly Single Node With Flexible Timing
concerning medications. We simulated repetitive treatments Most previous studies did not consider the timing of the
without changing the treated node. In the repetitive treatment treatment under the dynamically responding brain. When a
simulation,thesubsequenttreatmentwasappliedaftertheeffects treatmentisapplied,thebraingraduallyrecoversandtransitions
oftheprevioustreatmenthadbecomesaturated(i.e.,reachedan to an equilibrium state. Considering the restoration process,
equilibrium state). Figure8 shows the results of the repetitive one may apply the subsequent treatment at transient states
treatmentateachnode.Comparedtothesingletreatmentshown without waiting for the equilibrium state. We simulated
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 10 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE6|Therecoverycapacityattheedgesofthesubcortical-limbicsystem.(A,B)Themodelparameters(A)andthenumberofneighborsR masdegreesof
freedomofthesubcortical-limbicsystem(B)arepresented.(C)Recoverycapacities1Dareshownforalltheedges.Largerself-restorationoccurredintheedgeswith
highdegreesoffreedom(e.g.,orangeasterisk;edgebetweenRCAU-LTHL)thanedgeswithlowerdegreesoffreedom(e.g.,redasterisk;edgebetweenLPAL-L
NACC).Tworepresentativeexamplesoftreatmentsonthetwoedgesarepresentedtoshowtheirdifferencesintherecoveryprocesses.(D)Thedistancecurves(the
partialKL-divergence)fromthepretreatedstatearepresentedforthetworepresentativeedges;LPAL–LNACC(redasterisk)andRCAU–LTHL(orangeasterisk).(E)
DifferencesintheMEMparametersoftherecoveredstatesfromthepre-treatmentstateandtheschematicenergylandscapesofthefinalstatesfortherecoveredtwo
edgesareillustrated.
optimal repetitive treatment by optimizing the timing of performedbyincreasingpositiveinter-hemisphericconnectivity
subsequent treatments. In this simulation, we used the same anddecreasingthenegativeinterhemisphericconnectivityofthe
simulationsettingassimulation3,exceptfortheflexibletiming subcortical-limbic system by adding a Gaussian noise ∼ N(0,
of the treatment. Compared to simulation 4, we explored 0.1) according to the polarity of the initial connectivity. We
the best strength of the treatment and the best timing of testedtheoptimaltreatmentstrategyfordifferentnumbersand
subsequenttreatmentsforeachnode.AsshowninFigure9,the targets of interhemispheric edges (one, two, and three) to be
treatment with the best timing increased the treatment effect dissected(Figures10B,C).Foreachnumberofedges(49single
compared to treatment after full recovery for each treatment interhemisphericedges,i.e.,left7×right7,2,352combinations
(Figure8). for two edges, and 110,544 combinations for three edges),
we evaluated the best edges to remove. For the source brain,
Simulation 6. Optimal Removal of Edges dissection of LAMYG-RCAU (one edge); LAMYG-RCAU and
We simulated dissections of interhemispheric connections LAMYG- RPAL (two edges); LAMYG-RCAU, LAMYG- RPAL,
to imitate a corpus callosotomy for epilepsy surgery. We and LHIPP- RCAU (three edges) were the best combinations
generated an abnormal brain that has stronger connections to decrease the functional distance from the goal system
between the left and right hemispheres (Figure10A). This was (Figure10D).
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 11 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE7|Treatmentswithandwithoutconsiderationsoftheself-restoration.(A)Modelparametersofavirtual(source)systemandthesubcortical-limbicsystemas
agoalsystem,andthedifferencebetweenthegoalandthesourcesystemsaredisplayed.Thevirtualsystemisgeneratedbyaddinganoise(Ag−As)tothe
subcortical-limbicsystem.(B)Thedistancebetweenthegoalstateandthepredictedfinalstate,D Ag,Ar ,aftertreatmentateachnodewithoutconsideringthe
(cid:0) (cid:1)
self-restoration,wasminimalforthetreatmentontheLPUT.(C)Thefinalresultsoftreatmentsaredisplayedin(B),whichshowlongerdistancesfromthegoalstate
thanpredictedduetotherestorationprocess.Forexample,thetreatmentonnodeLPUTwithstrength0.45resultsindistance0.074,whichwasexpected0.055in
thepredictionwithoutconsideringtheself-restorationprocess.(D)Thefinaldistanceforeachnodetreatedbyconsideringself-restorationisdisplayed.Inthiscase,
BSTEMwasselectedasanoptimaltreatmentnodewith−0.5strength.(E–H)Thetreatmentandrestorationcurvesintermsofthedistancefromthegoalsystem(red)
andthepretreatedstate(blue)forthetreatmentonLPUTwithstrengthof0.45(E)andforthetreatmentonBSTEMwithstrengthof−0.5(G)aredisplayed.MEM
parameters(anddifferencesfromthepretreatedstate)atthefinalstatearedisplayedforthetreatmentonLPUT(F)andforthetreatmentonBSTEM(H).
DISCUSSION various dynamic state equations, the formulation of the self-
restorationprocesshasbeenrarelyresearched.
Although brain control has garnered increasing interest, brain To account for the effect of the restoration process on
controlresearchhasmainlybeenconductedbasedontheoretical brain control, we propose a formulation of thebrain’srecovery
and computational models as the practical control of the brain process that drives the system to perform the function before
has many challenges due to the complexity of the brain and treatment. The driving force of this self-restoration process is
ethicalissues.Severalcomputationalmodelstocontrolthebrain basedonthefree-energyprinciple(Fristonetal.,2006;Friston,
networkhavebeenproposedtocharacterizethegraph-theoretic 2010) over a non-linear complex system, with degeneracy in
properties of the system (Tang et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019; terms of generating the same behaviors from diverse network
Stisoetal.,2019;Karreretal.,2020)orapurposeofpredicting configurations. According to the free-energy principle (Friston
outcomes after treatment (Falcon et al., 2016; Jirsa et al., 2017; et al., 2006; Friston, 2010), the network is configured to
Proix et al., 2017; An et al., 2019; Olmi et al., 2019). These respondorpredicttheenvironment’sstatisticaldemands,making
previous studies have assumed the brain as a dynamic system, the system energy-efficient. As long as the environment’s
immediately responding to the incoming treatment. However, statisticsdonotchange,thetreatedorpartiallylesionedsystem
the system’s self-restoration process after the cessation of the may well-adjust its remaining subnetwork (neighbors of the
treatmenthasnotbeenfullyconsidered,withoutwhichthebrain treated node) to satisfy those demands. Since the altered
control may not be optimal. Compared to the brain circuit’s (treated) node cannot participate in the organized work of the
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 12 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE8|Multipletreatmentsforthenodesofasystem.(A)MEMparametersofthevirtualsourceandgoalsystems,andtheirdifferencesaredisplayed.(B)The
distances(partialKLdivergence)betweenthefinalstatesandthedesiredstatearedisplayedforeachtreatment.TheoptimaltreatmentwaschosenattheBSTEM.
ResultsofthetreatmentatLPUT(C–E)andBSTEM(F,G)areshown.(C)Atreatmentcurve(distancebetweenthetransientstateandthedesiredstate)witha
treatmentstrengthateachtreatment(arrows)isdisplayed.(D)MEMmodelofthefinalstateanditsdifferencefromthepre-treatedstateareshown.(E)Restoration
curveswithpotentialstrengthsofthetreatmentaredisplayedforthefirstandsecondtreatments.Inthefirsttreatment,thetreatmentstrengththatinducestheblack
linewaschosenastheoptimalstrengthsinceitfinallybecomesclosesttothedesiredstateaftersaturation.Afteratreatment,itgetsclosetothedesiredstateand
thenrecedesslightlyfromit.Inthesecondtreatment,sometreatmentstrengthsmakethesystemclosertothedesiredstateattheearlystageofthetreatment(blue
linesinthecircle).However,thosecurveseventuallydivergefromthegoalsystem.Theoptimaltreatmentstrengthinducedacurvecoloredinblack,whichinitially
deviatesfromthegoalsystembuteventuallycomesclosertothedesiredstatethananyothertreatmentstrengths.Forclarity,wescaledtherestorationtimeforeach
treatment.(F,G)AtreatmentcurveattheBSTEM(F)anditsfinalMEMparameteranditsdifferencesfromthepre-treatedstate(G)areshown.(H)Energylandscapes
ofthegoal,thevirtualsource,andfinalsystemsaftertreatmentatLPUTandBSTEMaredisplayed.
subnetwork at the same performance level as a pre-treatment using different configurations of networks (or connectivity).
state, the system tries to compensate for the role of the Since it is complicated to restore all connectivity after damage,
altered node by reorganizing interactions with its neighbors. optimal control utilizes non-linearity between networks and
This restoration process in the brain can be called a type of behaviors by reconfiguring networks among neighbors within
optimization process in that the system tries to adjust itself limited ranges to approximate the goal system dynamics.
and gradually approximates the desired functionality of the In this non-linear relationship, the closeness in the system
pre-treatment state by interaction with the environment under parameters (e.g., connectivity) does not necessarily indicate
biologicalconstraints. closenessinbehaviors.Insteadofmatchingnetworkconnectivity,
The other central concept of the current study is the thecurrentframeworkfitsbehaviors(i.e.,microstatedynamics)
redundant nature of the non-linear brain (Glassman, 1987; bymodulatingasmallernumberofnetworkparameters.Thisis
Edelman and Gally, 2001). A complex system has degeneracy, possibleasthebrainisacomplexnon-linearsystemfromwhich
i.e., the same or similar functions (behavior) can be achieved non-linearmicrostatedynamicsemerge.
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 13 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE9|Repetitivetreatmentswithflexibletreatmenttiming.(A)ThesamemodelinFigure8isusedforthecurrentsimulation.(B)Thedistancebetweenthegoal
andfinalstates,D Ag,Ar ,frommultipletreatmentswithflexibletimingoftreatmentisevaluatedforeachnode.ThebestnodeforthemultipletreatmentswastheL
(cid:0) (cid:1)
PUT.(C–F)ResultsofthetreatmentsatLPUT(C,D)andatBSTEM(E,F)aredisplayed.(C,E)Treatmentcurves(thedistancebetweenthetransientstatesandthe
goalsystem)aredisplayedforLPUTandBSTEM.Thearrowsindicatethetimingofeachtreatment,andthevaluesarethestrengthsofthetreatment.(D,F)MEM
parametersofthefinalsystemanditsdifferencefromtheinitialsystemareshown.(G)Energylandscapesofthegoalsystem,thevirtualsourcesystem,andfinal
systemsaftertreatmentattheLPUTandBSTEMaredisplayed.
Thenon-linearmicrostatedynamicsofabrainarerepresented brain can be considered in a network state of the macroscopic
in the microstate’s energy landscape, the microstate of which energy landscape. For example, the brain develops from one
is often defined by a distributed activity pattern over the networkstate(asetofnetworkparameters)toanother(another
temporal scale of a second. Energy landscape analysis has setofnetworkparameters).Anetworkstateinthemacroscopic
been applied to explore dynamics in large-scale functional energylandscapeisdefinedbyanetworkparameter,whichdiffers
brain networks, such as the default mode and pre-frontal from the definition of a microstate in the microscopic energy
networks, on resting-state fMRI (Watanabe et al., 2013, 2014a; landscape by a distributed activity pattern. In this respect, the
Kang et al., 2017, 2019) and in sleep (Watanabe et al., brain control problem is to choose an optimal way to guide
2014b). In our previous study (Kang et al., 2017), the energy a brain network to a desired network along the macroscopic
landscape analysis revealed that the subcortical brain at rest energylandscape.
exhibits the maximal number of stable states and small sets We assumed that the restoration process is conducted by
of stable states account for most of the occupation time. the cooperative activity among neural populations within the
Furthermore, a graph theory analysis of the energy landscape brain network, which tries to generate similar functionality
revealed a hub-like state transition organization embedded establishedbeforetreatment.Inthisprocess,thebrainnetwork’s
in the resting-state human brain (Kang et al., 2019). The modularity, an essential property to protect against damage to
energy landscape of brain states is governed by a set of a complex brain (Park and Friston, 2013; Sporns and Betzel,
networkparametersinthepairwiseMEM,uponwhichtreatment 2016),wouldbecrucialfortherecovery.Byrearrangingresources
isimposed. within a module (e.g., altering connectivity within a biological
Thebraincontrolextendstheenergylandscapeconceptatthe range), the modularity actuates the system’s reorganization
temporalscaleofasecond(microstates)totheenergylandscape to construct a similar behavior. There is plentiful evidence
over a more extended period. Over a longer period of years, a of modular-based reorganization in brain diseases (Balenzuela
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 14 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
FIGURE10|Optimaldissectionofedges,simulatingacorpuscallosotomyforepilepsysurgery.(A)MEMparametersofthevirtual(abnormalsource)systemandthe
goalsystem(subcortical-limbicsystem),andtheirdifferencesaredisplayed.Thevirtualsourcesystemwasgeneratedbyincreasingthestrengthsoftheconnectivity
betweentheleftandrighthemispheres.(B)Theboxgraphshowsthefinaldistancebetweenthegoalandthetreatedsystem,D Ag,Ar forallthecombinationsof
(cid:0) (cid:1)
dissectededgesbydissectingone,two,andthreeinter-hemisphericedges.Optimallytreatedresultsforeachnumberofedgesaredenotedwithcircles.(C)
Treatmentcurves(thedistancebetweenthetransientstateandthegoalsystem)aredisplayedfortheoptimallychosenedgesamongtheone(blueline),two(redline),
andthree(yellowline)edgecombinationsofdissection.(D)MEMparametersofthefinalsystemsafteroptimaltreatmentswithdifferentnumbersofdissectededges
aredisplayedwiththeirdifferencesfromtheinitialsourcesystem.
et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2013; Siegel et al., 2018). In this possible that some treatment parameters may lead the treated
study, nodes with more (stronger) connections (functional system unstable, generating abnormal functionality. The self-
neighbors) play a more efficient role in restoration than restoration process may also cause the malformation of the
nodes with fewer connections. Since the current test system function. By evaluating treatment outcomes for all possible
has a relatively small network size (nodes = 15), we did ranges of parameters, we may check unstable points before
not restrict the neighbors within a module but functionally deciding the treatment. The model-based prediction could also
close regions (Figure6). Even though not strictly the same be used in evaluating the treatment effect due to noise in the
as the modularity concept in systems science, the functional restoration process as a type of Monte-Carlo simulation (See
neighborsworkasafunctionalmoduleintermsofcooperation the SupplementaryMaterial). As the noise effects differ across
withinthemodule.Considerationofneighborsrestrictedwithin brain regions, one may choose a reliable target that is less
a functional module and within an anatomical limit of a sensitivetonoiseintherestorationprocess.Thetreatmentcould
larger network would be more realistic in modeling the benefit from evaluating the treatment outcomes with noise in
recoveryprocess. any parameters or any updating rules besides the restoration
Clinical treatment is generally exerted on the brain multiple process. This Monte-Carlo simulation may complement the
times.Aftertreatment,e.g.,antipsychoticmedication,clinicians limitation of the current deterministic approach. We used a
waittostabilizethebraintoavoidtransientstates.However,one simpledeterministicmodelanditssolverforthecontrolproblem
mayconsiderapplyingsubsequenttreatmentbeforestabilization. to explain the basic framework of brain control and show
Until fully stabilized, the system has multiple transient states the current framework’s construct validity. More sophisticated
for network parameters. Some transient states may be more models based on more advanced control theory methods, such
efficient in achieving a desired goal than the stabilized state. as a stochastic model proposed by Todorov (2009), could be
However, the transient state may be unstable, and finding an furtherresearched.
optimal strategy may be unpredictable. In the current study, Inthisstudy,weshowedtheconstructvalidityoftheproposed
we showed a possibility to optimize the right timing without framework using various simulations to consider the clinical
waiting for complete stabilization when we have a model for environment. A simulation suggests that the optimal brain
self-restorativeprocess. control should include the system’s self-restoration process,
The current framework as computational modeling takes without which a (so called optimal) treatment is not optimal.
advantageofpredictioncapacitybysimulation.Itistheoretically Using simulation, we also proposed how to control the
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 15 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
self-restoration process by choosing the optimal target region optimalbraincontrolwithinarestrictedtreatmentenvironment.
and treatment strength. We then presented simulations for Although further research with experimental data should be
optimizing repetitive treatments and the optimal timing of conducted, we believe the proposed computational framework
treatment. We found that some treatment choices led to a would help attain optimal brain control of the dynamic self-
degraded performance at an early stage but eventually showed restorativebrainaftertreatment.
a better treatment effect (Figure8). This is a typical example
of the non-linear property of the self-restoration system that DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
shouldbeconsideredinoptimalcontrol.Allofthesesimulations
suggest the plausibility and rationale of the proposed brain The MATLAB codes used in the current study are available
controlframework. by request or online from a public drive, http://bit.ly/monet-
The current study is theoretical, and we acknowledge all optimal-control-MEM.
possible limitations of the theoretical framework. The current
brain control framework will be more practical when we know
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
more about the system’s reorganization mechanisms. Empirical
experiments and validation are most demanding. Determining
H-JP developed the idea and JK performed experiments. Both
the means of achieving the desired treatment level at the right
wrotethemanuscript.
target for each treatment is one of the fundamental challenges.
Thedetailsoftherestorationprocessrequireextensiveresearch
FUNDING
and experiments. There exist many challenges before brain
control can be applied to actual experiments. However, the
ThisresearchwassupportedbyBrainResearchProgramandthe
current conceptual framework with the self-restorative process
BrainPoolProgramthroughtheNationalResearchFoundation
in the treatment is highly needed in clinical practices, which
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT
calls for personalized treatments based on individualized self-
(NRF-2017M3C7A1049051andNRF-2017H1D3A1A01053094).
restoration systems and basic neuroscience to understand how
thebrainworks.
Insummary,weproposeanoptimalbraincontrolframework SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
by introducing self-restoration processes in the brain after
treatment. Simulation results showing the responses and The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
movement of a source system toward the desired system online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.
in diverse testing sets suggest the framework’s plausibility in 2021.590019/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Cole,M.W.,Bassett,D.S.,Power,J.D.,Braver,T.S.,andPetersen,S.E.(2014).
Intrinsicandtask-evokednetworkarchitecturesofthehumanbrain.Neuron
Abbott, A. (2010). Schizophrenia: the drug deadlock. Nature 468, 158–159. 83,238–251.doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.05.014
doi:10.1038/468158a Cole, M. W., Ito, T., Bassett, D. S., and Schultz, D. H. (2016). Activity flow
An,S.,Bartolomei,F.,Guye,M.,andJirsa,V.(2019).Optimizationofsurgical overresting-statenetworksshapescognitivetaskactivations.Nat.Neurosci.19,
intervention outside the epileptogenic zone in the virtual epileptic patient 1718–1726.doi:10.1038/nn.4406
(VEP).PLoSComput.Biol.15:e1007051.doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007051 Cornblath, E. J., Tang, E., Baum, G. L., Moore, T. M., Adebimpe, A.,
Balenzuela,P.,Chernomoretz,A.,Fraiman,D.,Cifre,I.,Sitges,C.,Montoya,P., Roalf, D. R., et al. (2019). Sex differences in network controllability as
etal.(2010).Modularorganizationofbrainrestingstatenetworksinchronic a predictor of executive function in youth. Neuroimage 188, 122–134.
backpainpatients.Front.Neuroinform4:116.doi:10.3389/fninf.2010.00116 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.11.048
Bennabi,D.,Charpeaud,T.,Yrondi,A.,Genty,J.B.,Destouches,S.,Lancrenon, Deco, G., and Jirsa, V. K. (2012). Ongoing cortical activity at rest:
S.,etal.(2019).Clinicalguidelinesforthemanagementoftreatment-resistant criticality, multistability, and ghost attractors. J. Neurosci. 32, 3366–3375.
depression: french recommendations from experts, the french association doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2523-11.2012
for biological psychiatry and neuropsychopharmacology and the fondation Deco, G., Tononi, G., Boly, M., and Kringelbach, M. L. (2015). Rethinking
fondamental.BMCPsychiatry19:262.doi:10.1186/s12888-019-2237-x segregationandintegration:contributionsofwhole-brainmodelling.Nat.Rev.
Biswal, B., Yetkin, F. Z., Haughton, V. M., and Hyde, J. S. (1995). Functional Neurosci.16,430–439.doi:10.1038/nrn3963
connectivityinthemotorcortexofrestinghumanbrainusingecho-planar Edelman, G. M., and Gally, J. A. (2001). Degeneracy and complexity
MRI.Magn.Reson.Med.34,537–541.doi:10.1002/mrm.1910340409 in biological systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 13763–13768.
Breakspear,M.(2017).Dynamicmodelsoflarge-scalebrainactivity.Nat.Neurosci. doi:10.1073/pnas.231499798
20,340–352.doi:10.1038/nn.4497 Ezaki,T.,Sakaki,M.,Watanabe,T.,andMasuda,N.(2018).Age-relatedchanges
Cabral, J., Kringelbach, M. L., and Deco, G. (2014). Exploring the network intheeaseofdynamicaltransitionsinhumanbrainactivity.Hum.BrainMapp.
dynamicsunderlyingbrainactivityduringrest.Prog.Neurobiol.114,102–131. 39,2673–2688.doi:10.1002/hbm.24033
doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.12.005 Falcon,M.I.,Riley,J.D.,Jirsa,V.,Mcintosh,A.R.,ElinorChen,E.,andSolodkin,
Chen,G.,Zhang,H.Y.,Xie,C.,Chen,G.,Zhang,Z.J.,Teng,G.J.,etal.(2013). A.(2016).Functionalmechanismsofrecoveryafterchronicstroke:modeling
Modularreorganizationofbrainrestingstatenetworksanditsindependent withthevirtualbrain.eneuro3,1–14.doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0158-15.2016
validation in Alzheimer’s disease patients. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:456. Fox, M. D., and Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontaneous fluctuations
doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00456 in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 16 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 700–711. doi: 10.1038/ Liu,Y.Y.,Slotine,J.J.,andBarabasi,A.L.(2011).Controllabilityofcomplex
nrn2201 networks.Nature473,167–173.doi:10.1038/nature10011
Freyer,F.,Roberts,J.A.,Becker,R.,Robinson,P.A.,Ritter,P.,andBreakspear, Malone, L. A., and Felling, R. J. (2020). Pediatric stroke: unique implications
M.(2011).Biophysicalmechanismsofmultistabilityinresting-statecortical of the immature brain on injury and recovery. Pediatr. Neurol. 102, 3–9.
rhythms.J.Neurosci.31,6353–6361.doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6693-10.2011 doi:10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2019.06.016
Freyer,F.,Roberts,J.A.,Ritter,P.,andBreakspear,M.(2012).Acanonicalmodel Marder, E., and Goaillard, J. M. (2006). Variability, compensation and
ofmultistabilityandscale-invarianceinbiologicalsystems.PLoSComput.Biol. homeostasisinneuronandnetworkfunction.Nat.Rev.Neurosci.7,563–574.
8:e1002634.doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002634 doi:10.1038/nrn1949
Friston, K. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. Marder, E., Gutierrez, G. J., and Nusbaum, M. P. (2017). Complicating
4:e1000211.doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000211 connectomes: electrical coupling creates parallel pathways and degenerate
Friston,K.(2010).Thefree-energyprinciple:aunifiedbraintheory?Nat.Rev. circuitmechanisms.Dev.Neurobiol.77,597–609.doi:10.1002/dneu.22410
Neurosci.11,127–138.doi:10.1038/nrn2787 Mattson,M.P.(2008).Glutamateandneurotrophicfactorsinneuronalplasticity
Friston,K.,Kilner,J.,andHarrison,L.(2006).Afreeenergyprincipleforthebrain. anddisease.Ann.N.Y.Acad.Sci.1144,97–112.doi:10.1196/annals.1418.005
J.Physiol.Paris100,70–87.doi:10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001 Mikellidou, K., Arrighi, R., Aghakhanyan, G., Tinelli, F., Frijia, F., Crespi, S.,
Friston,K.J.,andPrice,C.J.(2003).Degeneracyandredundancyincognitive etal.(2019).Plasticityofthehumanvisualbrainafteranearlycorticallesion.
anatomy.TrendsCogn.Sci.7,151–152.doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00054-8 Neuropsychologia128,166–177.doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.10.033
Glassman, R. B. (1987). An hypothesis about redundancy and reliability Murphy,T.H.,andCorbett,D.(2009).Plasticityduringstrokerecovery:from
in the brains of higher species: analogies with genes, internal organs, synapsetobehaviour.Nat.Rev.Neurosci.10,861–872.doi:10.1038/nrn2735
and engineering systems. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 11, 275–285. Murrough, J. W., and Russo, S. J. (2019). The neurobiology of
doi:10.1016/S0149-7634(87)80014-3 resilience: complexity and hope. Biol. Psychiatry 86, 406–409.
Goellner,E.,Bianchin,M.M.,Burneo,J.G.,Parrent,A.G.,andSteven,D.A. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.07.016
(2013).Timingofearlyandlateseizurerecurrenceaftertemporallobeepilepsy Olmi,S.,Petkoski,S.,Guye,M.,Bartolomei,F.,andJirsa,V.(2019).Controlling
surgery.Epilepsia54,1933–1941.doi:10.1111/epi.12389 seizure propagation in large-scale brain networks. PLoS Comput. Biol.
Gu, S., Betzel, R. F., Mattar, M. G., Cieslak, M., Delio, P. R., Grafton, S. T., 15:e1006805.doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006805
etal.(2017).Optimaltrajectoriesofbrainstatetransitions.Neuroimage148, Park, B., Kim, D.-S., and Park, H.-J. (2014). Graph independent component
305–317.doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.01.003 analysis reveals repertoires of intrinsic network components in the human
Gu,S.,Cieslak,M.,Baird,B.,Muldoon,S.F.,Grafton,S.T.,Pasqualetti,F.,etal. brain.PLoSONE9:e82873.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0082873
(2018).Theenergylandscapeofneurophysiologicalactivityimplicitinbrain Park,H.J.,andFriston,K.(2013).Structuralandfunctionalbrainnetworks:from
networkstructure.Sci.Rep.8:2507.doi:10.1038/s41598-018-20123-8 connectionstocognition.Science342:1238411.doi:10.1126/science.1238411
Jirsa, V. K., Proix, T., Perdikis, D., Woodman, M. M., Wang, H., Gonzalez- Park, H. J., Pae, C., Friston, K., Jang, C., Razi, A., Zeidman, P., et al. (2017).
Martinez, J., et al. (2017). The virtual epileptic patient: individualized Hierarchicaldynamiccausalmodelingofresting-statefmrirevealslongitudinal
whole-brain models of epilepsy spread. Neuroimage 145, 377–388. changesineffectiveconnectivityinthemotorsystemafterthalamotomyfor
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.04.049 essentialtremor.Front.Neurol.8:346.doi:10.3389/fneur.2017.00346
Jung,K.,Friston,K.J.,Pae,C.,Choi,H.H.,Tak,S.,Choi,Y.K.,etal.(2018). Park,H.J.,Park,B.,Kim,H.Y.,Oh,M.K.,Kim,J.I.,Yoon,M.,etal.(2015).
Effectiveconnectivityduringworkingmemoryandrestingstates:aDCMstudy. A network analysis of (1)(5)O-H(2)O PET reveals deep brain stimulation
Neuroimage169,485–495.doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.12.067 effectsonbrainnetworkofparkinson’sdisease.YonseiMed.J.56,726–736.
Kang, J., Eo, J., Lee, D. M., and Park, H. J. (2021). A computational doi:10.3349/ymj.2015.56.3.726
framework for optimal control of a self-adjustive neural system with Park, S., Park, H. J., Kyeong, S. H., Moon, I. S., Kim, M., Kim, H. N., et al.
activity-dependent and homeostatic plasticity. Neuroimage 230:117805. (2013). Combined rTMS to the auditory cortex and prefrontal cortex for
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.117805 tinnituscontrolinpatientswithdepression:apilotstudy.ActaOtolaryngol.
Kang,J.,Pae,C.,andPark,H.J.(2017).Energylandscapeanalysisofthesubcortical 133,600–606.doi:10.3109/00016489.2012.763181
brain network unravels system properties beneath resting state dynamics. Potkin,S.G.,Kane,J.M.,Correll,C.U.,Lindenmayer,J.P.,Agid,O.,Marder,S.
Neuroimage149,153–164.doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.01.075 R.,etal.(2020).Theneurobiologyoftreatment-resistantschizophrenia:paths
Kang, J., Pae, C., and Park, H. J. (2019). Graph-theoretical analysis toantipsychoticresistanceandaroadmapforfutureresearch.NPJSchizophr.
for energy landscape reveals the organization of state transitions 6:1.doi:10.1038/s41537-019-0090-z
in the resting-state human cerebral cortex. PLoS ONE 14:e0222161. Proix, T., Bartolomei, F., Guye, M., and Jirsa, V. K. (2017). Individual brain
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0222161 structure and modelling predict seizure propagation. Brain 140, 641–654.
Kar, S. K. (2019). Predictors of response to repetitive transcranial magnetic doi:10.1093/brain/awx004
stimulationindepression:areviewofrecentupdates.Clin.Psychopharmacol. Rabinovich,M.I.,andVarona,P.(2011).Robusttransientdynamicsandbrain
Neurosci.17,25–33.doi:10.9758/cpn.2019.17.1.25 functions.Front.Comput.Neurosci.5:24.doi:10.3389/fncom.2011.00024
Karrer, T. M., Kim, J. Z., Stiso, J., Kahn, A. E., Pasqualetti, F., Habel, Russo,S.J.,Murrough,J.W.,Han,M.H.,Charney,D.S.,andNestler,E.J.(2012).
U., et al. (2020). A practical guide to methodological considerations in Neurobiologyofresilience.Nat.Neurosci.15,1475–1484.doi:10.1038/nn.3234
the controllability of structural brain networks. J. Neural Eng. 17:026031. Saur, D., Lange, R., Baumgaertner, A., Schraknepper, V., Willmes, K., Rijntjes,
doi:10.1088/1741-2552/ab6e8b M.,etal.(2006).Dynamicsoflanguagereorganizationafterstroke.Brain129,
Kelso, J. A. (2012). Multistability and metastability: understanding dynamic 1371–1384.doi:10.1093/brain/awl090
coordinationinthebrain.Philos.Trans.R.Soc.Lond.BBiol.Sci.367,906–918. Schreglmann,S.R.,Krauss,J.K.,Chang,J.W.,Martin,E.,Werner,B.,Bauer,R.,
doi:10.1098/rstb.2011.0351 etal.(2018).Functionallesionalneurosurgeryfortremor:backtothefuture?J.
King, A. (2016). Neurobiology: rise of resilience. Nature 531, S18–S19. Neurol.Neurosurg.Psychiatr.89,727–735.doi:10.1136/jnnp-2017-316301
doi:10.1038/531S18a Siegel, J. S., Seitzman, B. A., Ramsey, L. E., Ortega, M., Gordon, E. M.,
Krienen, F. M., Yeo, B. T. T., and Buckner, R. L. (2014). Reconfigurable Dosenbach, N. U. F., et al. (2018). Re-emergence of modular brain
task-dependentfunctionalcouplingmodesclusteraroundacorefunctional networks in stroke recovery. Cortex 101, 44–59. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.
architecture.Philos.Trans.R.Soc.BBiol.Sci.369.doi:10.1098/rstb.2013.0526 12.019
Lee,I.C.,Li,S.Y.,andChen,Y.J.(2017).Seizurerecurrenceinchildrenafter Smith, S. M., Fox, P. T., Miller, K. L., Glahn, D. C., Fox, P. M., Mackay,
stopping antiepileptic medication: 5-year follow-up. Pediatr. Neonatol. 58, C. E., et al. (2009). Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture
338–343.doi:10.1016/j.pedneo.2016.08.005 during activation and rest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 13040–13045.
Lee,W.H.,Rodrigue,A.,Glahn,D.C.,Bassett,D.S.,andFrangou,S.(2019). doi:10.1073/pnas.0905267106
Heritabilityandcognitiverelevanceofstructuralbraincontrollability.Cereb. Sporns,O.,andBetzel,R.F.(2016).Modularbrainnetworks.Annu.Rev.Psychol.
Cortex.30,3044–3054.doi:10.1093/cercor/bhz293 67,613–640.doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-122414-033634
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 17 April2021|Volume15|Article590019
ParkandKang OptimalControlofSelf-RestorativeBrain
Stiso, J., Khambhati, A. N., Menara, T., Kahn, A. E., Stein, J. M., Das, S. during sleep. Neuroimage 98, 1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.
R., et al. (2019). White matter network architecture guides direct electrical 04.079
stimulationthroughoptimalstatetransitions.CellRe.28,2554–2566.e2557. Watanabe,T.,Masuda,N.,Megumi,F.,Kanai,R.,andRees,G.(2014c).Energy
doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.08.008 landscapeanddynamicsofbrainactivityduringhumanbistableperception.
Tang, E., Giusti, C., Baum, G. L., Gu, S., Pollock, E., Kahn, A. E., et al. Nat.Commun.5:4765.doi:10.1038/ncomms5765
(2017). Developmental increases in white matter network controllability Yeh,F.C.,Tang,A.N.,Hobbs,J.P.,Hottowy,P.,Dabrowski,W.,Sher,A.,etal.
support a growing diversity of brain dynamics. Nat. Commun. 8:1252. (2010).Maximumentropyapproachestolivingneuralnetworks.Entropy12,
doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01254-4 89–106.doi:10.3390/e12010089
Tavor,I.,Jones,O.P.,Mars,R.B.,Smith,S.M.,Behrens,T.E.,andJbabdi,S. Yeo, B. T. T., Krienen, F. M., Eickhoff, S. B., Yaakub, S. N., Fox, P. T.,
(2016).Task-freeMRIpredictsindividualdifferencesinbrainactivityduring Buckner, R. L., et al. (2015). Functional specialization and flexibility in
taskperformance.Science352,216–220.doi:10.1126/science.aad8127 humanassociationcortex.Cerebr.Cortex25,3654–3672.doi:10.1093/cercor/
Todorov,E.(2009).Efficientcomputationofoptimalactions.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. bhu217
U.S.A.106,11478–11483.doi:10.1073/pnas.0710743106 Yu, R., Park, H. J., Cho, H., Ko, A., Pae, C., Oh, M. K., et al. (2018).
Tognoli, E., and Kelso, J. A. (2014). The metastable brain. Neuron 81, 35–48. Interregional metabolic connectivity of 2-deoxy-2[(18) F]fluoro-D-glucose
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.022 positronemissiontomographyinvagusnervestimulationforpediatricpatients
VanEssen,D.C.,Ugurbil,K.,Auerbach,E.,Barch,D.,Behrens,T.E.,Bucholz,R., withepilepsy:aretrospectivecross-sectionalstudy.Epilepsia59,2249–2259.
etal.(2012).Thehumanconnectomeproject:adataacquisitionperspective. doi:10.1111/epi.14590
Neuroimage62,2222–2231.doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.018
Vorovenci, R. J., Biundo, R., and Antonini, A. (2016). Therapy-resistant ConflictofInterest:Theauthorsdeclarethattheresearchwasconductedinthe
symptoms in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neural Transm. 123, 19–30. absenceofanycommercialorfinancialrelationshipsthatcouldbeconstruedasa
doi:10.1007/s00702-015-1463-8 potentialconflictofinterest.
Watanabe,T.,Hirose,S.,Wada,H.,Imai,Y.,Machida,T.,Shirouzu,I.,etal.(2013).
Apairwisemaximumentropymodelaccuratelydescribesresting-statehuman Copyright © 2021 Park and Kang. This is an open-access article distributed
brainnetworks.Nat.Commun.4:1370.doi:10.1038/ncomms2388 under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The
Watanabe, T., Hirose, S., Wada, H., Imai, Y., Machida, T., Shirouzu, I., et al. use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
(2014a).Energylandscapesofresting-statebrainnetworks.Front.Neuroinform original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
8:12.doi:10.3389/fninf.2014.00012 publicationinthisjournaliscited,inaccordancewithacceptedacademicpractice.
Watanabe, T., Kan, S., Koike, T., Misaki, M., Konishi, S., Miyauchi, Nouse,distributionorreproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththese
S., et al. (2014b). Network-dependent modulation of brain activity terms.
FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 18 April2021|Volume15|Article590019