bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 1
Simulating emotions: An active inference model of emotional state inference
and emotion concept learning
Ryan Smith,1 Thomas Parr,2 Karl J. Friston,2
1Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa, OK, USA
2Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, WC1N 3BG, UK
Corresponding Author Information:
Ryan Smith
Laureate Institute for Brain Research
6655 S Yale Ave, Tulsa, OK 74136, USA
Email: rsmith@laureateinstitute.org
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 2
Abstract
The ability to conceptualize and understand one’s own affective states and
responses – or “emotional awareness” (EA) – is reduced in multiple psychiatric
populations; it is also positively correlated with a range of adaptive cognitive and
emotional traits. While a growing body of work has investigated the neurocognitive
basis of EA, the neurocomputational processes underlying this ability have received
limited attention. Here, we present a formal Active Inference (AI) model of emotion
conceptualization that can simulate the neurocomputational (Bayesian) processes
associated with learning about emotion concepts and inferring the emotions one is
feeling in a given moment. We validate the model and inherent constructs by
showing (i) it can successfully acquire a repertoire of emotion concepts in its
“childhood”, as well as (ii) acquire new emotion concepts in synthetic “adulthood,”
and (iii) that these learning processes depend on early experiences, environmental
stability, and habitual patterns of selective attention. These results offer a proof of
principle that cognitive-emotional processes can be modeled formally, and highlight
the potential for both theoretical and empirical extensions of this line of research on
emotion and emotional disorders.
Keywords: Emotion Concepts; Trait Emotional Awareness; Learning; Computational
Neuroscience; Active Inference
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 3
Simulating emotions: An active inference model of emotional state inference
and emotion concept learning
The ability to conceptualize and understand one’s affective responses has
become the topic of a growing body of empirical work (McRae, Reiman, Fort, Chen,
& Lane, 2008; R. Smith, Alkozei, et al., 2017; R. Smith et al., 2015; R. Smith, Kaszniak,
Katsanis, Lane, & Nielsen, 2019; R. Smith, Lane, Alkozei, et al., 2018; R. Smith, Lane,
et al., 2017; R. Smith, Lane, Sanova, et al., 2018; R. Smith, Quinlan, et al., 2019; R.
Smith, Sanova, Alkozei, Lane, & Killgore, 2018; Wright, Riedel, Sechrest, Lane, &
Smith, 2017). This body of work has also given rise to theoretical models of its
underlying cognitive and neural basis (Barrett, 2017; Kleckner et al., 2017; Lane,
Weihs, Herring, Hishaw, & Smith, 2015; Panksepp, Lane, Solms, & Smith, 2017; R.
Smith, Killgore, & Lane, 2018; R. Smith & Lane, 2015, 2016; Wilson-Mendenhall,
Barrett, Simmons, & Barsalou, 2011). Attempts to operationalize this cognitive-
emotional ability have led to a range of overlapping constructs, including trait
emotional awareness (Lane & Schwartz, 1987), emotion differentiation or
granularity (Kashdan, Barrett, & McKnight, 2015; Kashdan & Farmer, 2014), and
alexithymia (Bagby, Parker, & Taylor, 1994a, 1994b).
This work is motivated to a large degree by the clinical relevance of emotion
conceptualization abilities. In the literature on the construct of emotional
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 4
awareness, for example, lower levels of conceptualization ability have been
associated with several psychiatric disorders as well as poorer physical health
(Baslet, Termini, & Herbener, 2009; Berthoz, Ouhayoun, & Parage, 2000; Bydlowski
et al., 2005; Consoli et al., 2010; Donges et al., 2005; Frewen et al., 2008; Lackner,
2005; Levine, Marziali, & Hood, 1997; Moeller et al., 2014; A. Subic-Wrana, Beetz,
Paulussen, Wiltnik, & Beutel, 2007; C. Subic-Wrana, Bruder, Thomas, Lane, & Köhle,
2005); conversely, higher ability levels have been associated with a range of
adaptive emotion-related traits and abilities (Barchard & Hakstian, 2004; Bréjard,
Bonnet, & Pedinielli, 2012; Ciarrochi, Caputi, & Mayer, 2003; Lane, Quinlan,
Schwartz, Walker, & Zeitlin, 1990; Lane et al., 1996; Lane, Sechrest, Riedel, Shapiro,
& Kaszniak, 2000). Multiple evidence-based psychotherapeutic modalities also aim
to improve emotion understanding as a central part of psycho-education in
psychotherapy (Barlow, Allen, & Choate, 2016; Hayes & Smith, 2005).
While there are a number of competing views on the nature of emotions,
most (if not all) accept that emotion concepts must be acquired through experience.
For example, “basic emotions” theories hold that emotion categories like sadness
and fear each have distinct neural circuitry, but do not deny that knowledge about
these emotions must be learned (Panksepp & Biven, 2012). Constructivist views
instead hold that emotion categories do not have a 1-to-1 relationship to distinct
neural circuitry, and that emotion concept acquisition is necessary for emotional
experience (Barrett, 2017). While these views focus on understanding the nature of
emotions themselves, we have recently proposed a neurocognitive model – termed
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 5
the “three-process model” (TPM; (R. Smith, 2019; R. Smith, Kaszniak, et al., 2019; R.
Smith, Killgore, et al., 2018)) of emotion episodes – with a primary focus on
accounting for individual differences in emotional awareness. This model
characterizes a range of emotion-related processes that could contribute to trait
differences in both the learning and deployment of emotion concepts in order to
understand one’s own affective responses (and in the subsequent use of these
concepts to guide adaptive decision-making). The TPM distinguishes the following
three broadly defined processes (see figure 1):
1. Affective response generation: a process in which somatovisceral and
cognitive states are automatically modulated in response to an affective
stimulus (whether real, remembered, or imagined) in a context-dependent
manner, based on an (often implicit) appraisal of the significance of that
stimulus for the survival and goal-achievement of the individual (i.e.,
predictions about the cognitive, metabolic, and behavioral demands of the
situation).
2. Affective response representation: a process in which the somatovisceral
component of an affective response is subsequently perceived via afferent
sensory processing, and then conceptualized as a particular emotion (e.g.,
sadness, anger, etc.) in consideration of all other available sources of
information (e.g., stimulus/context information, current thoughts/beliefs
about the situation, etc.).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 6
3. Conscious access: a process in which the representations of somatovisceral
percepts and emotion concept representations may or may not enter and be
held in working memory – constraining the use of this information in goal-
directed decision-making (e.g., verbal reporting, selection of voluntary
emotion regulation strategies, etc.).
Figure 1. Graphical illustration of the three-process model of emotion episodes (R. Smith, 2019; R. Smith,
Kaszniak, et al., 2019; R. Smith, Killgore, et al., 2018; R. Smith, Lane, Parr, & Friston, 2019). Here an event
(either internal or external, and either real, remembered, or imagined) is represented in the brain at
various levels of abstraction. This complex set of representations is evaluated in terms of its significance
to the organism at both implicit (e.g., low-level conditioned or unconditioned responses) and explicit
(e.g., needs, goals, values) levels, leading to predictions about the cognitive, metabolic, and behavioral
demands of the situation. These predictions initiate an “affective response” with both peripheral and
central components. This includes quick, involuntary autonomic and skeletomotor responses (e.g., heart
rate changes, facial expression changes) as well as involuntary shifts in the direction of cognitive
resources (e.g., attention and interpretation biases, action selection biases). This multicomponent
affective response is represented centrally at a perceptual and conceptual level (e.g., valenced bodily
sensations and interpretations of those responses as corresponding to particular emotions).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 7
Representations of events, evaluations, bodily sensations, emotion concepts (etc.) can then be attended
to and gated into working memory (“conscious access”). If gated into and held in working memory, these
representations can be integrated with explicit goals, reflected upon, and used to guide deliberative,
goal-directed decision-making. The thick red arrows highlight the processes we explicitly model in this
paper.
The TPM has also proposed a tentative mapping to the brain in terms of interactions
between large-scale neural networks serving domain-general cognitive functions.
Some support for this proposal has been found within recent neuroimaging studies
(R. Smith, Alkozei, et al., 2017; R. Smith, Bajaj, et al., 2018; R. Smith, Lane, Alkozei, et
al., 2018; R. Smith, Lane, et al., 2017; R. Smith, Lane, Sanova, et al., 2018; R. Smith,
Sanova, et al., 2018). However, the neurocomputational implementation of these
processes has not been thoroughly considered. The computational level of
description offers the promise of providing more specific and mechanistic insights,
which could potentially be exploited to inform and improve pharmacological and
psychotherapeutic interventions. While previous theoretical work has applied
active inference concepts to emotional phenomena (Barrett & Simmons, 2015;
Clark, Watson, & Friston, 2018; Joffily & Coricelli, 2013; Seth, 2013; Seth & Friston,
2016; R. Smith, Thayer, Khalsa, & Lane, 2017; R. Smith, Weihs, Alkozei, Killgore, &
Lane, 2019), no formal modeling of emotion concept learning has yet been
performed. In this manuscript, we aim to take the first steps in constructing an
explicit computational model of the acquisition and deployment of emotion concept
knowledge (i.e., affective response representation) as described within the TPM
(subsequent work will focus on affective response generation and conscious access
processes; see (R. Smith, Lane, et al., 2019)). Specifically, we present a simple Active
Inference model (Friston et al., 2016; Friston, FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck, &
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 8
Pezzulo, 2017) of emotion conceptualization, formulated as a Markov Decision
Process. We then outline some initial insights afforded by simulations using this
model.
In what follows, we first provide a brief review of active inference. We will
place a special emphasis on deep generative models that afford the capacity to
explain multimodal (i.e., interoceptive, proprioceptive and exteroceptive) sensations
that are characteristic of emotion concepts. We then introduce a particular model of
emotion inference that is sufficiently nuanced to produce synthetic emotional
processes but sufficiently simple to be understood from a ‘first principles’ account.
We then establish the validity of this model using numerical analyses of emotion
concept learning during (synthetic) neurodevelopment. We conclude with a brief
discussion of the implications of this work; particularly for future applications.
An Active Inference model of emotion conceptualization
A primer on Active Inference
Active Inference (AI) starts from the assumption that the brain is an
inference machine that approximates optimal probabilistic (Bayesian) belief
updating across all biopsychological domains (e.g., perception, decision-making,
motor control, etc.). AI postulates that the brain embodies an internal model of the
world (including the body) that is “generative” in the sense that it is able to simulate
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 9
the sensory data that it should receive if its model of the world is correct. This
simulated (predicted) sensory data can be compared to actual observations, and
deviations between predicted and observed sensations can then be used to update
the model. On short timescales (e.g., a single trial in a perceptual decision-making
task) this updating corresponds to perception, whereas on longer timescales it
corresponds to learning (i.e., updating expectations about what will be observed on
subsequent trials). One can see these processes as ensuring the generative model
(embodied by the brain) remains an accurate model of the world (Conant & Ashbey,
1970).
Action (be it skeletomotor, visceromotor, or cognitive action) can be cast in
similar terms. For example, actions can be chosen to resolve uncertainty about
variables within a generative model (i.e., sampling from domains in which the model
does not make precise predictions). This can prevent future deviations from
predicted outcomes. In addition, the brain must continue to make certain
predictions simply in order to survive. For example, if the brain did not in some
sense continue to “expect” to observe certain amounts of food, water, shelter, social
support, and a range of other quantities, then it would cease to exist (McKay &
Dennett, 2009); as it would not pursue those behaviors leading to the realization of
these expectations (c.f. ‘the optimism bias’ (Sharot, 2011)). Thus, there is a deep
sense in which the brain must continually seek out observations that support – or
are internally consistent with – its own continued existence. As a result, decision-
making can be cast as a process in which the brain infers the sets of actions
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 10
(policies) that would lead to observations most consistent with its own survival-
related expectations (i.e., its “prior preferences”). Mathematically, this can be
described as selecting policies that maximize a quantity called “Bayesian model
evidence” – that is, the probability that sensory data would be observed under a
given model. In other words, because the brain is itself a model of the world, action
can be understood as a process by which the brain seeks out evidence for itself –
sometimes known as self-evidencing (Hohwy, 2016).
In a real-world setting, directly computing model evidence becomes
mathematically intractable. Thus, the brain must use some approximation. AI
proposes that the brain instead computes a statistical quantity called free energy.
Unlike model evidence, computing free energy is mathematically tractable. Crucially,
this quantity provides a bound on model evidence, such that minimization of free
energy is equivalent to maximizing model evidence. By extension, in decision-
making an agent can evaluate the expected free energy of the alternative policies she
could select – that is, the free energy of future trajectories under each policy (i.e.,
based on predicted future outcomes, given the future states that would be expected
under each policy). Therefore, decision-making will be approximately (Bayes)
optimal if it operates by inferring (and enacting) the policy that minimizes expected
free energy – and thereby maximize evidence for the brain’s internal model.
Interestingly, expected free energy can be decomposed into terms reflecting
uncertainty and prior preferences, respectively. This decomposition explains why
agents that minimizes expected free energy will first select exploratory policies that
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 11
minimize uncertainty in a new environment (often called the “epistemic value”
component of expected free energy). Once uncertainty is resolved, the agent then
selects policies that exploit that environment to maximize her prior preferences
(often called the “pragmatic value” component of expected free energy). The formal
mathematical basis for AI has been detailed elsewhere (Friston, FitzGerald, et al.,
2017), and the reader is referred there for a full mathematical treatment (also see
figure 2 for some additional detail).
Figure 2. This figure illustrates the mathematical framework of active inference and associated neural
process theory used in the simulations described in this paper. (Left) Illustration of the Markov decision
process formulation of active inference. The generative model is here depicted graphically, such that
arrows indicate dependencies between variables. Here observations (o) depend on hidden states (s), as
specified by the A matrix, and those states depend on both previous states (as specified by the B matrix,
or the initial states specified by the D matrix) and the policies (π) selected by the agent. The probability
of selecting a particular policy in turn depends on the expected free energy (G) of each policy with
respect to the prior preferences (C) of the agent. The degree to which expected free energy influences
policy selection is also modulated by a prior policy precision parameter (γ), which is in turn dependent
on beta (β) –where higher values of beta promote more randomness in policy selection (i.e., less
influence of the differences in expected free energy across policies). (Middle/Right) The differential
equations in the middle panel approximate Bayesian belief updating within the graphical model
depicted on the left via a gradient descent on free energy (F). The right panel also illustrates the
proposed neural basis by which neurons making up cortical columns could implement these equations.
The equations have been expressed in terms of two types of prediction errors. State prediction errors
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 12
(ε) signal the difference between the (logarithms of) expected states (s) under each policy and time
point—and the corresponding predictions based upon outcomes/observations (A matrix) and the
(preceding and subsequent) hidden states (B matrix, and, although not written, the D matrix for the
initial hidden states at the first time point). These represent prior and likelihood terms respectively –
also marked as messages 2, 3, and 4, which are depicted as being passed between neural populations
(colored balls) via particular synaptic connections in the right panel (note: the dot notation indicates
transposed matrix multiplication within the update equations for prediction errors) . These (prediction
error) signals drive depolarization (v) in those neurons encoding hidden states (s), where the
probability distribution over hidden states is then obtained via a softmax (normalized exponential)
function (σ). Outcome prediction errors (ς) instead signal the difference between the (logarithms of)
expected observations (o) and those predicted under prior preferences (C). This term additionally
considers the expected ambiguity or conditional entropy (H) between states and outcomes as well as a
novelty term (W) reflecting the degree to which beliefs about how states generate outcomes would
change upon observing different possible state-outcome mappings (computed from the A matrix). This
prediction error is weighted by the expected observations to evaluate the expected free energy (G) for
each policy (π), conveyed via message 5. These policy-specific free energies are then integrated to give
the policy expectations via a softmax function, conveyed through message 1. Actions at each time point
(u) are then chosen out of the possible actions under each policy (U) weighted by the value (negative
expected free energy) of each policy. In our simulations, the model learned associations between hidden
states and observations (A) via a process in which counts were accumulated (a) reflecting the number of
times the agent observed a particular outcome when she believed that she occupied each possible
hidden state. Although not displayed explicitly, learning prior expectations over initial hidden states (D)
is similarly accomplished via accumulation of concentration parameters (d). These prior expectations
reflect counts of how many times the agent believes it previously occupied each possible initial state.
Concentration parameters are converted into expected log probabilities using digamma functions (ψ).
As already stated, the right panel illustrates a possible neural implementation of the update equations in
the middle panel. In this implementation, probability estimates have been associated with neuronal
populations that are arranged to reproduce known intrinsic (within cortical area) connections. Red
connections are excitatory, blue connections are inhibitory, and green connections are modulatory (i.e.,
involve a multiplication or weighting). These connections mediate the message passing associated with
the equations in the middle panel. Cyan units correspond to expectations about hidden states and
(future) outcomes under each policy, while red states indicate their Bayesian model averages (i.e., a
“best guess” based on the average of the probability estimates for the states and outcomes across
policies, weighted by the probability estimates for their associated policies). Pink units correspond to
(state and outcome) prediction errors that are averaged to evaluate expected free energy and
subsequent policy expectations (in the lower part of the network). This (neural) network formulation of
belief updating means that connection strengths correspond to the parameters of the generative model
described in the text. Learning then corresponds to changes in the synaptic connection strengths. Only
exemplar connections are shown to avoid visual clutter. Furthermore, we have just shown neuronal
populations encoding hidden states under two policies over three time points (i.e., two transitions),
whereas in the task described in this paper there are greater number of allowable policies. For more
information regarding the mathematics and processes illustrated in this figure, see (Friston et al., 2016;
Friston, FitzGerald, et al., 2017; Friston, Lin, et al., 2017; Friston, Parr, & de Vries, 2017).
When a generative model is formulated as a partially observable Markov
decision process, active inference takes a particular form. Specifically, specifying a
generative model in this context requires specifying the allowable policies, hidden
states of the world (that the brain cannot directly observe but must infer), and
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 13
observable outcomes, as well as a number of matrices that define the probabilistic
relationships between these quantities (see figure 2). The ‘A’ matrix specifies which
outcomes are generated by each combination of hidden states (i.e., a likelihood
mapping indicating the probability that a particular set of outcomes would be
observed given a particular hidden state). The ‘B’ matrix encodes state transitions,
specifying the probability that one hidden state will evolve into another over time.
Some of these transitions are controlled by the agent, according to the policy that
has been selected. The ‘D’ matrix encodes prior expectations about the initial hidden
state of the world. The ‘E’ matrix encodes prior expectations about which policies
will be chosen (e.g., frequently repeated habitual behaviors will have higher prior
expectation values). Finally, the ‘C’ matrix encodes prior preferences over outcomes.
Outcomes and hidden states are generally factorized into multiple outcome
modalities and hidden state factors. This means that the likelihood mapping (the ‘A’
matrix) plays an important role in modeling the interactions among different hidden
states at each level of a hierarchical model when generating the outcomes at the
level below. One can think of each factor and modality as an independent group of
competing states or observations within a given category. For example, one hidden
state factor could be “birds,” which includes competing interpretations of sensory
input as corresponding to either hawks, parrots, or pigeons, whereas a separate
factor could be “location,” with competing representations of where a bird is in the
sky. Similarly, one outcome modality could be size (e.g., is the bird big or small?)
whereas another could be color (is the bird black, white, green, etc.?).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 14
As shown in the middle and right panels of figure 2, active inference is also
equipped with a neural process theory – a proposed manner in which neuronal
circuits and their dynamics can invert generative models via a set of linked update
equations that minimize prediction errors. In this neuronal implementation, the
probability of neuronal firing in specific populations is associated with the expected
probability of a state, whereas postsynaptic membrane potentials are associated
with the logarithm of this probability. A softmax function acts as an activation
function – transforming membrane potentials into firing rates. With this setup,
postsynaptic depolarizations (driven by ascending signals) can be understood as
prediction errors (free energy gradients) about hidden states – arising from linear
mixtures in the firing rates of other neural populations. These prediction errors
(postsynaptic currents) in turn drive membrane potential changes (and resulting
firing rates). When predictions errors are minimized, postsynaptic influences no
longer drive changes in activity (depolarizations and firing rates), corresponding to
minimum free energy.
Via similar dynamics, predictions errors about outcomes (i.e., the deviation
between preferred outcomes and those predicted under each policy) can also be
computed and integrated (i.e., averaged) to evaluate the expected free energy
(value) of each policy (i.e., underwriting selection of the policy that best minimizes
these prediction errors). Dopamine dynamics also modulate policy selection, by
encoding estimates of the expected uncertainty over policies – where greater
expected uncertainty promotes less deterministic policy selection. Phasic dopamine
responses correspond to updates in expected uncertainty over policies – which
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 15
occur when there is a prediction error about expected free energy; that is, when
there is a difference between the expected free energy of policies before and after a
new observation.
Finally, and most centrally for the simulations we report below, learning in
this theory corresponds to a form of synaptic plasticity remarkably similar to
Hebbian coincidence-based learning mechanisms associated with empirically
observed synaptic long-term potentiation and depression (LTP and LTD) processes
(Brown, Zhao, & Leung, 2010). Here one can think of the strength of each synaptic
connection as a parameter in one of the matrices described above. For example, the
strength of one synapse could encode the amount of evidence a given observation
provides for a given hidden state (i.e., an entry in the ‘A’ matrix), whereas another
synapse could encode the probability of a state at a later time given a state at an
earlier time (i.e., an entry in the ‘B’ matrix). Mathematically, the synaptic strengths
correspond to Dirichlet parameters that increase in value in response to new
observations. One can think of this process as adding counts to each matrix entry
based on coincidences in pre- and post-synaptic activity. For example, if beliefs
favor one hidden state, and this co-occurs with a specific observation, then the
strength of the value in the ‘A’ matrix encoding the relationship between that state
and that observation will increase. Counts also increase in similar fashion in the ‘D’
matrix encoding prior beliefs about initial states (whenever a given hidden state is
observed at the start of a trial) as well as in the ‘B’ matrix encoding beliefs about
transition probabilities (whenever one specific state is followed by another). For a
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 16
more detailed discussion, please see the legend for figure 2 and associated
references.
In what follows, we describe how this type of generative model was specified
to perform emotional state inference and emotion concept learning. We also present
simulated neural responses based on the neural process theory described above.
A model of emotion inference and concept learning
In this paper we focus on the second process in the TPM – affective response
representation – in which a multifaceted affective response is generated and the
ensuing (exteroceptive, proprioceptive and interoceptive) outcomes are used to
infer or represent the current emotional state. The basic idea is to equip the
generative model with a space of emotion concepts (i.e., latent or hidden states) that
generate the interoceptive, exteroceptive and proprioceptive consequences (at
various levels of abstraction) of being in a particular emotional state. Inference
under this model then corresponds to inferring that one of several possible emotion
concepts is the best explanation for the data at hand (e.g., “my unpleasant feeling of
increased heart rate and urge to run away must indicate that I am afraid to give this
speech”). Crucially, to endow emotion concept inference with a form of mental
action (Limanowski & Friston, 2018; Metzinger, 2017), we also included a state
factor corresponding to selective attention. Transitions between attentional states
were under control of the agent (i.e., ‘B’ matrices were specified for all possible
transitions between these states). The ‘A’ matrix mapping emotion concepts to
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 17
lower-level observations differed in each attentional state, such that precise
information about each type of lower-level information was only available in one
attentional state (e.g., the agent needed to transition into the “attention to valence”
state to gain precise information whether she was feeling pleasant or unpleasant,
and so forth; see figure 3C).
The incorporation of selective attention in emotional state inference and
learning within our model was motivated by several factors. First, multiple
psychotherapeutic modalities improve clients’ understanding of their own emotions
in just this way; that is, by having them selectively attend to and record the contexts,
bodily sensations, thoughts, action tendencies, and behaviours during emotion-
episodes (e.g., (Barlow et al., 2016; Hayes & Smith, 2005)). Second, low emotional
awareness has been linked to biased attention in some clinical contexts (Lane,
Anderson, & Smith, 2018). Third, related personality factors (e.g., biases toward
“externally oriented thinking”) are included in leading self-report measures of the
related construct of alexithymia (Parker, Taylor, & Bagby, 2003). Finally, emotion
learning in childhood appears to involve parent-child interactions in which parents
draw attention to (and label) bodily feelings and behaviors during a child’s affective
responses (e.g., see work on attunement, social referencing, and related aspects of
emotional development (Licata, Kristen, & Sodian, 2016; Mumme, Fernald, &
Herrera, 1996; R. Smith, Killgore, et al., 2018)) – and the lack of such interactions
hinders emotion learning (and mental state learning more generally; (Colvert et al.,
2008)).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 18
In our model, we used relatively high level ‘outcomes’ (i.e., themselves
standing in for lower-level representations) to summarise the products of belief
updating at lower levels of a hierarchical model. These outcomes were domain-
specific, covering interoceptive, proprioceptive and exteroceptive modalities. A full
hierarchical model would consider lower levels, unpacked in terms of sensory
modalities; however, the current model, comprising just two levels, is sufficient for
our purposes. The bottom portion of Figure 3A (in grey) acknowledges the broad
form that these lower-level outcomes would be expected to take. The full three-
process model would also contain a higher level corresponding to conscious
accessibility (for an explicit model and simulations of this higher level, see (R. Smith,
Lane, et al., 2019)). This is indicated by the grey arrows at the top of Figure 3A.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 19
Figure 3. (A) Displays the levels of hidden state factor 1 (emotion concepts) and their mapping to
different lower-level representational contents (here modelled as outcomes). Each emotion concept
generated different outcome patterns (see text for details), although some were more specific than
others (e.g., HAPPY generated high and low arousal equally; denoted by thin dotted connections). The A-
matrix encoding these mappings is shown in figure 3C. The B-matrix, also shown in figure 3C, was an
identity mapping between emotion states, such that emotions were stable within trials. The precision of
this matrix (i.e., implicit beliefs about emotional stability) could be adjusted via passing this matrix
through a softmax function with different temperature parameter values. This model simulates the
affective response representation process within the three-process model of emotion episodes (R. Smith,
2019; R. Smith, Kaszniak, et al., 2019; R. Smith, Killgore, et al., 2018). Black arrows on the right and left
indicate the direction by which hidden causes generate observations (the generative process) and the
direction of inference in which observations are used to infer their hidden causes (emotion concepts)
using the agent’s generative model. The grey arrows/boxes at the bottom and top of the figure denote
other processes within the three-process model (i.e., affective response generation and conscious
accessibility) that are not explicitly modeled in the current work (for simulations of the conscious
accessibility process, see (R. Smith, Lane, et al., 2019)).
Crucially, as mentioned above, attentional focus was treated as a (mental)
action that determines the outcome modality or domain to which attention was
selectively allocated. Effectively, the agent had to decide which lower-level
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 20
representations to selectively attend to (i.e., which sequential attention policy to
select) in order to figure out what emotional state she was in. Mathematically, this
was implemented via interactions in the likelihood mapping – such that being in a
particular attentional state selected one and only one precise mapping between the
emotional state factor and the outcome information in question (see figure 3C).
Formally, this implementation of mental action or attentional focus is exactly the
same used to model the exploration of a visual scene using overt eye movements
(Mirza, Adams, Mathys, & Friston, 2016). However, on our interpretation, this
epistemic foraging was entirely covert; hence mental action (c.f., the premotor
theory of attention; (Posner, 2016; Rizzolatti, Riggio, Dascola, & Umiltá, 1987; D.
Smith & Schenk, 2012)).
Figure 3 illustrates the resulting model. The first hidden state factor was a
space of emotion concepts (SAD, AFRAID, ANGRY, and HAPPY). The second hidden
state factor was attentional focus, and the ‘B’ matrix for this second factor allowed
state transitions to be controlled by the agent. The agent could choose to attend to
three sources of bodily (interoceptive/proprioceptive) information, corresponding
to affective valence (pleasant or unpleasant sensations), autonomic arousal (e.g.,
high or low heart rate), and motivated proprioceptive action tendencies (approach
or avoid). The agent could also attend to two sources of exteroceptive information,
including the perceived situation (involving social rejection or a crowded event) and
subsequent beliefs about responsibility (attributing agency/blame to self or
another). These different sources of information are based on a large literature
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 21
within emotion research, indicating that they are jointly predictive of self-reported
emotions and/or are important factors in affective processing (Barrett, 2017;
Barrett, Mesquita, & Gendron, 2011; Harmon-Jones, Gable, & Peterson, 2010;
Lindquist & Barrett, 2008; Russell, 2003; Scherer, 2009; Siemer, Mauss, & Gross,
2007).
Our choice of including valence in particular reflects the fact that our model
deals with high levels of hierarchical processing (this choice also enables us to
connect more fluently with current literature on emotion concept categories). In this
paper, we are using labels like ‘unpleasant’ as pre-emotional constructs. In other
words, although affective in nature, we take concepts like ‘unpleasant’ as
contributing to elaborated emotional constructs during inference. Technically,
valenced states provide evidence for – or are a consequence of – emotional state
inference at a higher level (e.g., pleasant sensations provide evidence that one is
feeling a positive emotion like excitement, joy, or contentment, whereas unpleasant
sensations provide evidence that one may be feeling a negative emotion such as as
sadness, fear, or anger). Based on previous work (Clark et al., 2018; Joffily &
Coricelli, 2013), we might expect valence to correspond to changes in the
precision/confidence associated with lower-level visceromotor and skeletomotor policy
selection, or to related internal estimates that can act as indicators of success in
uncertainty resolution; see (Clark et al., 2018; de Berker et al., 2016; Joffily & Coricelli,
2013; Peters, McEwen, & Friston, 2017)). Put another way, feeling good may correspond
to high confidence in one’s model of how to act, whereas feeling bad may reflect the
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 22
opposite. Explicitly modelling these lower-level dynamics in a deep temporal model
will be the focus of future work.
Figure 3. (B) Displays the levels of hidden state factor 2 (focus of attention) and its mapping to
representational outcomes. Each focus of attention mapped deterministically (the A-matrix was a fully
precise identity matrix) to a “location” (i.e., an internal source of information) at which different
representational outcomes could be observed. Multiple B-matrices, depicted in figure 3C, provided
controllable transitions (i.e., actions) such that the agent could choose to shift her attention from one
internal representation to another to facilitate inference. The agent always began a trial in the “start”
attentional state, which provided no informative observations. The final attentional shift in the trial was
toward a (proprioceptive) motor response to report an emotion (i.e., at whatever point in the trial the
agent became sufficiently confident, at which point the state could not change until the end of the trial),
which was either correct or incorrect. The agent preferred (expected) to be correct and not to be
incorrect. Because policies (i.e., sequences of implicit attentional shifts and subsequent explicit reports)
were selected to minimize expected free energy, emotional state inference under this model entails a
sampling of salient representational outcomes and subsequent report – under the prior preference that
the report would elicit the outcome of “correct” social feedback. In other words, policy selection was
initially dominated by the epistemic value part of expected free energy (driving the agent to gather
information about her emotional state); then, as certainty increased, the pragmatic value part of
expected free energy gradually began to dominate (driving the agent to report her emotional state).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 23
In the simulations we report here, there were 6 time points in each epoch or
trial of emotion inference. At the first time point, the agent always began in an
uninformative initial state of attentional set (the “start” state). The agent’s task was
to choose what to attend to, and in which order, to infer her most likely emotional
state. When she became sufficiently confident, she could choose to respond (i.e.,
reporting that she felt sad, afraid, angry, or happy). In these simulations the agent
selected “shallow” one-step policies, such that she could choose what to attend to
next – to gain the most information. Given the number of time points, the agent
could choose to attend to up to four of the five possible sources of outcome
information before reporting her beliefs about her emotional state. The ‘A’ matrix
mapping attentional focus to attended outcomes was an identity matrix, such that
the agent always knew which lower-level information she was currently attending
to. This may be thought of as analogous to the proprioceptive feedback consequent
on a motor action.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 24
Figure 3. (C) Displays select matrices defining the generative model (lighter colors indicate higher
probabilities). ‘D’ matrices indicate a flat distribution over initial emotional states and a strong belief
that the attentional state will begin in the “start” state. ‘A’ matrices indicate the observations (rows) that
would be generated by each emotional state (columns) depending on the current state of attention, as
well as the social feedback (accuracy information) that would be generated under each emotional state
depending on chosen self-reports. ‘B’ matrices indicate that emotional states are stable within a trial
(i.e., states transition only to themselves such that the state transition matrix is an identity matrix) and
that the agent can choose to shift attention to each modality of lower-level information (i.e., by selecting
the transitions encoded by ‘B’ matrices 2-6), or report her emotional state (i.e., by selecting the
transitions entailed by ‘B’ matrices 7-10), at which point she could no longer leave that state. Only the
first and last two possible attentional shifting actions (‘B’ matrices) are shown due to space constraints
(note: the first ‘B’ matrix for this factor corresponds to remaining in the starting state and is not shown);
‘B’ matrices 4-8 take identical form, but with the row vector [1 1 1 1 1 1] spanning the first 6 columns
progressively shifted downward with each matrix, indicating the ability to shift from each attentional
state to the attentional state corresponding to that row. The ‘C’ matrix indicates a preference for
“correct” social feedback and an aversion to “incorrect” social feedback.
The ‘B’ matrix for hidden emotional states was also an identity matrix,
reflecting the belief that emotional states are stable within a trial (i.e., if you start
out feeling sad, then you will remain sad throughout the trial). This sort of
probability transition matrix in the generative model allows evidence to be
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 25
accumulated for one state or another over time; here, the emotion concept that
provides the best explanation for actively attended evidence in the outcome
modalities. The ‘A’ matrix – mapping emotion concepts to outcomes – was
constructed such that certain outcome combinations were more consistent with
certain emotional states than others: SAD was probabilistically associated with
unpleasant valence, either low or high arousal (e.g., lying in bed lethargically vs.
intensely crying), avoidance motivation, social rejection, and self-attribution (i.e.,
self-blame). AFRAID generated unpleasant valence, high arousal, avoidance, other-
blame (c.f., fear often being associated with its perceived external cause), and either
social rejection or a crowded event (e.g., fear of a life without friends vs. panic in
crowded spaces). ANGRY generated unpleasant valence, high arousal, approach,
social rejection, and other-blame outcomes. Finally, HAPPY generated pleasant
valence, either low or high arousal, either approach or avoidance (e.g., feeling
excited to wake up and go to work vs. feeling content in bed and not wanting to go
to work), and a crowded event (e.g., having fun at a concert). Because HAPPY does
not have strong conceptual links to blame, we defined a flat mapping between
HAPPY and blame, such that either type of blame provided no evidence for or
against being happy. Although this mapping from emotional states to outcomes has
some face validity, it should not be taken too seriously. It was chosen primarily to
capture the ambiguous and overlapping correlates of emotion concepts, and to
highlight why adaptive emotional state inference and emotion concept learning can
represent difficult problems.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 26
If the ‘A’ matrix encoding state-outcome relationships was completely
precise (i.e., if the contingencies above were deterministic as opposed to
probabilistic), sufficient information could be gathered through (at most) three
attentional shifts; but this becomes more difficult when probabilistic mappings are
imprecise (i.e., as they more plausibly are in the real world). Figure 4 illustrates this
by showing how the synthetic subjects confidence about her state decreases as the
precision of the mapping between emotional states and outcomes decreases (we
measured confidence here in terms of the accuracy of responding in relation to the
same setup with infinite precision). Changes in precision were implemented via a
temperature parameter of a softmax function applied to a fully precise version of
likelihood mappings between emotion concepts and the 5 types of lower-level
information that the agent could attend to (where a higher value indicates higher
precision). For a more technical account of this type of manipulation, please see
(Parr & Friston, 2017a).
Figure 4 additionally demonstrates how reporting confidence decreases with
decreasing precision of the ‘B’ matrix encoding emotional state transitions, where
low precision corresponds to the belief that emotional states are unstable over time.
Interestingly, these results suggest that expectations about emotional instability
would reduce the ability to understand or infer one’s own emotions. From a
Bayesian perspective, this result is very sensible: if we are unable to use past beliefs
to contextualise the present, it is much harder to accumulate evidence in favour of
one hypothesis about emotional state relative to another. Under moderate levels of
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 27
precision, our numerical analysis demonstrates that the model can conceptualize
the multimodal affective responses it perceives with high accuracy.
Figure 4. Displays the accuracy of the model (percentage of correct inferences over 30 trials) under
different levels of precision for two parameters (denoted by temperature values for a softmax function
controlling the specificity of the A and B matrices for hidden state factor 1; higher values indicate higher
precision). As can be seen, the model performs with high accuracy at moderate levels of precision.
However, its ability to infer its own emotions becomes very poor if the precision of either matrix
becomes highly imprecise. Accuracy here is defined in relation to the response obtained from an agent
with infinite precision – and can be taken as a behavioural measure of the quality of belief updating
about emotional states. These results illustrate how emotion concepts could be successfully inferred
despite variability in lower-level observations (e.g., contexts, arousal levels), as would be expected
under constructivist theories of emotion (Barrett, 2017); however, they also demonstrate limits in
variability, beyond which self-focused emotion recognition would begin to fail.
Figure 5 illustrates a range of simulation results from an example trial under
moderately high levels of ‘A’ and ‘B’ matrix precision (temperature parameter = 2
for each). The upper left plot shows the sequence of (inferred) attentional shifts
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 28
(note: darker colours indicate higher probability beliefs of the agent, and cyan dots
indicate the true states). In this trial, the agent chose a policy in which it attended to
valence (observing “unpleasant”), then beliefs (observing “other-blame”), then
action (observing “approach”), at which time she became sufficiently confident and
chose to report that she was angry. The lower left plot displays the agent’s posterior
beliefs at the end of the trial about her emotional state at each timepoint in the trial,
in this case inferring that she had been (and still was) angry. Note that this reflects
retrospective inference, and not the agent’s beliefs at each timepoint. The lower
right and upper right plots display simulated neural responses (based on the neural
process theory that accompanies this form of active inference; (Friston, FitzGerald,
et al., 2017)), in terms of single-neuron firing rates (raster plots) and local field
potentials, respectively. The simulated firing rates in the lower right plot illustrate
that the agent’s confidence that she was angry increased gradually with each new
observation.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 29
Figure 5. This figure illustrates a range of simulation results from one representative trial under high
levels of A- and B- matrix precision (temperature parameter = 2 for each matrix). (Upper Left) Displays a
sequence of chosen attentional shifts. The agent here chose a policy in which it attended to valence, then
beliefs, then action motivation, and then chose to report that it was angry. Darker colors indicate higher
confidence (probability estimates) in the model about its actions, whereas the cyan dot indicates the
true action. (Bottom left) Displays the agent’s posterior beliefs about her emotional state across the trial.
These posterior beliefs indicate that, at the end of the trial, the agent retrospectively inferred (correctly)
that she was angry throughout the whole trial (i.e., despite not being aware of this until the fourth
timestep, as indicated by the firing rates encoding confidence updates over time in the bottom right).
(Lower Right/ Upper Right) Plots simulated neural responses in terms of single-neuron firing rates
(raster plots) and local field potentials (rates of change in neural firing), respectively. Here each
neuron’s activity codes the probability of occupying a particular hidden state at a particular point in
time during the trial (based on the neural process theory depicted in figure 2; see (Friston, FitzGerald, et
al., 2017)).
The simulations presented in Figures 4 and 5 make some cardinal points.
First, it is fairly straightforward to simulate emotion processing in terms of
emotional state inference. This rests upon a particular sort of generative model that
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 30
can generate outcomes in multiple modalities. The recognition of an emotional state
corresponds to the inversion of such models – and therefore necessarily entails
multimodal integration. In other words, successfully disambiguating the most likely
emotional state here requires consideration of the specific multimodal patterns of
experience (i.e., incorporating interoceptive, exteroceptive, and proprioceptive
sensations) that would be expected under each emotional state. We have also seen
that this form of belief updating – or evidence accumulation – depends sensitively
on what sort of evidence is actively attended. This equips the model of emotion
concept representation with a form of mental action, which speaks to a tight link
between emotion processing and attention to various sources of evidence from
within the body – and beyond. Choices to shift attention vs. to self-report are
respectively driven by the epistemic and pragmatic value of each allowable policy,
such that pragmatic value gradually comes to drive the selection of reporting
policies as the expected information gain of further attentional shifts decreases. The
physiological plausibility of this emotion inference process has been briefly
considered in terms of simulated responses. In the next section, we turn to a more
specific construct validation, using empirical phenomenology from
neurodevelopmental studies of emotion.
Simulating the influence of early experience on emotional state inference and
emotion concept learning
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 31
Having confirmed that our model could successfully infer emotional states –
if equipped with emotion concepts – we are now in a position to examine emotion
concept learning. Specifically, we investigated the conditions under which emotion
concepts could be acquired successfully and the conditions under which this type of
emotion learning and inference fails.
Can emotion concepts be learned in childhood?
The first question we asked was whether our model could learn about
emotions, if it started out with no prior beliefs about how emotions structure its
experience. To answer this question, we first ran the model’s ‘A’ matrix (mapping
emotion concepts to attended outcome information) through a softmax function
with a temperature parameter of 0, creating a fully imprecise likelihood mapping.
This means that each hidden emotional state predicted all outcomes equally
(effectively, none of the hidden states within the emotion factor had any conceptual
content). Then we generated 200 sets of observations (i.e., 50 for each emotion
concept, evenly interleaved) based on the probabilistic state-outcome mappings
encoded in the model described above (i.e., the “generative process”). That is, 50
interleaved learning trials for each emotion were generated by probabilistically
sampling from a moderately precise version of the ‘A’ matrix distribution depicted
in figure 3C (i.e., temperature parameter = 2). This resulted in 50 sets of
observations consistent with the probabilistic mappings for each emotion (e.g., this
entailed that roughly 50% of HAPPY trials involved observations of low vs. high
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 32
arousal, whereas only roughly 1% of HAPPY trials involved the observation of social
rejection, etc.). After the 200 learning trials, we then examined the changes in the
model’s reporting accuracy over time. This meant that the agent, who began with no
emotion knowledge (i.e., a fully uninformative ‘A’ matrix), observed patterns of
observations consistent with each emotion (as specified above) at 50 timepoints
spread out across the 200 trials and needed to learn these associations (i.e., learn
the appropriate ‘A’ matrix mapping). This analysis was repeated at several levels of
outcome (‘A’ matrix) and transition (‘B’ matrix) precision in the generative process –
to explore how changes in the predictability or consistency of observed outcome
patterns affected the model’s ability to learn. In this model, learning was
implemented through updating (concentration) parameters for the model’s ‘A’
matrix after each trial. The model could also learn prior expectations for being in
different emotional states, based on updating concentration parameters for its ‘D’
matrix after each trial (i.e., the emotional state it started in). For details of these free
energy minimizing learning processes, please see (Friston et al., 2016).
We observed that the model could successfully reach 100% accuracy (with
minor fluctuation) when both outcome and transition precisions in the generative
process were moderately high (i.e., when the temperature parameters for the ‘A’
and ‘B’ matrix of the generative process were 2). The top panel in Figure 6
illustrates this by plotting the percentage accuracy across all emotions during
learning over 200 trials (in bins of 10 trials), and for each emotion (in bins of 5). As
can be seen, the model steadily approaches 100% accuracy across trials. The middle
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 33
and lower panels of Figure 6 illustrate the analogous results when outcome
precision and transition precision were lowered, respectively. The precision values
chosen for these illustrations (‘A’ precision = 1.5, ‘B’ precision = 0.5) represent
observed “tipping points” at which learning began to fail (i.e., at progressively lower
precision values learning performance steadily approached 0% accuracy). As can be
seen, lower precision in either the stability of emotions over time or the consistency
between observations and emotional states confounded learning. Overall, these
findings provide a proof of principle that this sort of model can learn emotion
concepts, if provided with a representative and fairly consistent sample of
experiences in its “childhood.”
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 34
Figure 6. This figure illustrates simulated “childhood” emotion concept learning, in which the agent
started out with no emotion concept knowledge (a uniform likelihood mapping from emotional states to
outcomes) and needed to learn the correct likelihood mapping over 50 interleaved observations of the
outcome patterns associated with each emotion concept (200 trials total). Left panels show changes in
accuracy over time in 20-trial bins, at different levels of outcome pattern precision (i.e., ‘A’ and ‘B’ matrix
precision, reflecting the consistency in the mapping between emotions and outcomes and the stability of
emotional states over time, respectively). Right panels show the corresponding results for each emotion
separately (5-trial bins). (Top) With moderately high precision (temperature parameter = 2 for both ‘A’
and ‘B’ matrices), learning was successful. (Middle and Bottom) With reduced ‘A’ precision or ‘B’
precision (respectively), learning began to fail.
Can a new emotion concept be learned in adulthood?
We then asked whether a new emotion could be learned later, after others
had already been acquired (e.g., as in adulthood). To answer this question, we again
initialized the model with a fully imprecise ‘A’ matrix (temperature parameter = 0)
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 35
and set the precision of the ‘A’ and ‘B’ matrices of the generative process to the
levels at which “childhood” learning was successful (i.e., temperature parameter = 2
for each). We then exposed the model to 150 observations that only contained the
outcome patterns associated three of the four emotions (50 for each emotion, evenly
interleaved). We again allowed the model to accumulate experience in the form of
concentration parameters for its ‘D’ matrix – allowing it to learn strong expectations
for the emotional states it repeatedly inferred it was in. After these initial 150 trials,
we then exposed the model to 200 further trials – using the outcome patterns under
all four emotions (50 for each emotion, evenly interleaved). We then asked whether
the emotion that was not initially necessary to explain outcomes could be acquired
later, when circumstances change.
We first observed that, irrespective of which three emotions were initially
presented, accuracy was high by the end of the initial 150 trials (i.e., between 80-
100% accuracy for each of the 3 emotion concepts learned). The upper and middle
panels of Figure 7 illustrate the accuracy over the subsequent 200 trials as the new
emotion was learned. As can be seen in the upper left and right sections of Figure 7,
ANGRY and SAD were both successfully learned. Interestingly, performance for the
other emotions appeared to temporarily drop and then increase again as the new
emotion concept was acquired (a type of temporary retroactive interference).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 36
Figure 7. This figure illustrates emotion concept learning in “adulthood”, where three emotion concepts
had already been learned (in 150 previous trials not illustrated) and a fourth was now needed to explain
patterns of outcomes (over 200 trials, 50 of which involved the new emotion in an interleaved
sequence). The top four plots illustrate learning for each of the four emotion concepts. ANGRY and SAD
were successfully acquired. HAPPY was also successfully acquired, but interfered with previous SAD
concept learning. As shown in the bottom left, this was ameliorated by providing the model with more
“childhood” learning trials before the new emotion was introduced. AFRAID was not successfully
acquired. This was (partially) ameliorated by first flooding the model with repeated observations of
AFRAID-consistent outcomes before interleaving it with the other emotions, as displayed in the bottom
right. All simulations were carried out with moderately high levels of precision (temperature parameter
= 2 for both ‘A’ and ‘B’ matrices).
The middle left section of Figure 7 demonstrates that HAPPY could also be
successfully learned; however, it appeared to interfere with prior learning for SAD.
Upon further inspection, it appeared that SAD may not have been fully acquired in
the first 150 trials (only reaching 80% accuracy near the end). We therefore chose
to examine whether an “extended” or “emotionally enriched” childhood might
prevent this interference, by increasing the initial learning trial number from 150 to
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 37
225 (75 interleaved exposures to SAD, ANGRY, and AFRAID outcome patterns). As
can be seen in the lower left panel of Figure 7, HAPPY was quickly acquired in the
subsequent 200 trials under these conditions, without interference with previous
learning.
Somewhat surprisingly, the model was unable to acquire the AFRAID concept
in its “adulthood” (Figure 7, middle right). To better understand this, for each trial
we computed the expected evidence for each state, under the distribution of
outcomes expected under the generative process (using bar notation to distinguish
the process from the model) given a particular state, (𝐸 [(𝑜|𝑠)]). This was based
𝑃̅(𝑜|𝑠)
on the reasoning that, if we treat the different emotional states as alternative
models to explain the data, then the likelihood of data given states is equivalent to
the evidence for a given state. Figure 8A plots the log transform of this expected
evidence for each established emotion concept expected under the distribution of
outcomes that would be generated if the ‘real’ emotional state were AFRAID (right
panel) and contrasts it with the analogous plot for HAPPY (left panel), which was a
more easily acquired concept (we took the logarithm of this expected evidence [or
likelihood] to emphasize the lower evidence values; note that higher [less negative]
values correspond to greater evidence in these plots).
As can be seen, in the case of HAPPY the three previously acquired emotion
concepts had a relatively low ability to account for all observations, and so HAPPY
was a useful construct in providing more accurate explanations of observed
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 38
outcomes. In contrast, when learning AFRAID the model was already confident in its
ability to explain its observations (i.e., the other concepts already had much higher
evidence than in the case of HAPPY), and the “AFRAID” outcome pattern also
provided moderate evidence for ANGRY and SAD (i.e., the outcome patterns
between AFRAID and these other emotion concepts had considerable overlap). In
figure 8B, we illustrate the ‘A’ and ‘D’ matrix values the agent had learned after the
total 350 trials (i.e., 150 + 200, as described above), and an examplar trial in which
the agent mistook fear for anger (which was the most common confusion). As can be
seen, while the ‘A’ matrix mappings were learned fairly well, the agent had learned a
strong prior expectation for ANGRY in comparison to its expectation for AFRAID. In
the example trial the agent first attends to beliefs (observing other-blame) and then
to the context (observing social rejection). These observations are consistent with
both ANGRY and AFRAID; however, social rejection is more uniquely associated
with ANGRY (i.e., AFRAID is also associated with crowded events, while ANGER is
not). Combined with the higher prior expectation for ANGRY, the agent “jumps to
conclusions” and becomes sufficiently confident to report ANGER (at which point
she receives “incorrect” social feedback). Here, correct inference of AFRAID (i.e.,
disambiguating AFRAID from ANGRY) would have required that the agent also
attend to her action tendencies (where she would have observed avoidance
motivation) before deciding which emotion to report.
In this context, greater evidence for an unexplained outcome pattern would
be required to “convince” the agent that its currently acquired concepts were not
sufficient and that further information gathering (i.e., a greater number of
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 39
attentional shifts) was necessary before becoming sufficiently confident to report
her emotions. Based on this insight, we examined ways in which the model could be
given stronger evidence that its current conceptual repertoire was insufficient to
account for its observations. We first observed that we could improve model
performance by “flooding” the model with an extended pattern of only AFRAID-
consistent outcomes (i.e., 100 trials in a row), prior to reintroducing the other
emotions in an interleaved fashion. As can be seen in Figure 7 (bottom right), this
led to successful acquisition of AFRAID. However, it temporarily interfered with
previous learning of the HAPPY concept. We also observed that by instead
increasing the number of AFRAID learning trials from 200 to 600, the model
eventually increased its accuracy to between 40% and 80% across the last 10 bins
(last 50 trials) – indicating that learning could occur, but at a much slower rate.
Figure 8A. (Left) The log expected probability of outcomes under the HAPPY outcome distribution, given
each of the four emotion concepts in the agent’s model (i.e., given the ‘A’ matrix it had learned) at each of
200 learning trials, 𝑬 𝑷̅(𝒐|𝒔=𝑯𝑨𝑷𝑷𝒀) [𝑷(𝒐|𝒔)] (note: the bar over P indicates the generative process
distribution). (Right) The analogous results for the AFRAID outcome pattern. These plots illustrate that
HAPPY may have been more easily acquired than AFRAID because the agent was less confident in the
explanatory power of its current conceptual repertoire when it began to observe the HAPPY outcome
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 40
pattern than when it began to observe the AFRAID outcome pattern. This also shows that the AFRAID
outcome pattern provided some evidence for SAD and ANGRY in the agent’s model, likely due to outcome
pattern overlap between AFRAID and these other two concepts.
Figure 8B. Illustrated the priors (D) and likelihoods (A) learned after 50 observations of SAD, ANGRY,
and HAPPY (150 trials total) followed by 200 trials in which SAD, AFRAID, ANGRY, and HAPPY were each
presented 50 times. As can be seen, while the ‘A’ matrices are fairly well learned, the agent acquired a
strong prior expectation for ANGRY. As shown in the example trial in the bottom left, this led the agent to
“jump to conclusions” and report ANGER on AFRAID trials after making 2 observations consistent with
both ANGRY and AFRAID (other-blame and social rejection, as shown in the bottom right). In this case,
the agent would have needed to attend to her motivated actions (avoid) to correctly infer AFRAID.
Overall, these results confirmed that a new emotion concept could be learned
in synthetic “adulthood,” as may occur, for example, in psycho-educational
interventions during psychotherapy. However, these results also demonstrate that
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 41
this type of learning can be more difficult. These results therefore suggest a kind of
“sensitive period” early in life where emotion concepts are more easily acquired.
Can maladaptive early experiences bias emotion conceptualization?
The final question we asked was whether unfortunate early experiences could
hinder our agent’s ability to adaptively infer and/or learn about emotions. Based on
the three-process model (R. Smith, Killgore, et al., 2018), it has previously been
suggested that at least two mechanisms could bring this about:
1. Impoverished early experiences (i.e., not being exposed to the different
patterns of observations that would facilitate emotion concept learning).
2. Having early experiences that reinforce maladaptive cognitive habits (e.g.,
selective attention biases), which can hinder adaptive inference (if the
concepts have been acquired) and learning (if the concepts have not yet been
acquired).
We chose to examine both of these possibilities below.
Non-representative early emotional experiences. To examine the first
mechanism (involving the maladaptive influence of “unrepresentative” early
experiences), we used the same learning procedure and parameters described in the
previous sections. In this case, however, we exposed the agent to 200 outcomes
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 42
generated by a generative process where one emotion was experienced 50 times
more often than others. Specifically, we examined the cases of a childhood filled
with either chronic fear/threat or chronic sadness, as a potential means of
simulating the effects of continual childhood abuse or neglect (the sadness
simulations might also be relevant to chronic depression over several years). We
then examined the model’s ability to learn to infer new emotions in a subsequent
200 trials.
In general, we observed that primarily experiencing fear or sadness during
childhood (which could also be thought of as undifferentiated in the sense that they
could not be contrasted with other emotions) led the agent to have notable
difficulties in learning new emotions later in life. These results were variable upon
repeated simulations with different emotions (e.g., verbal reporting continually
fluctuated between high and low levels of accuracy for some emotions, while
accuracy remained near 0% for others, while yet others were well acquired). For
example, in one representative simulation, in which the agent primarily experienced
fear during childhood, reporting accuracy continually varied for HAPPY (45%
accuracy in the final 20 trials), remained at 0% for ANGRY, remained at 100% for
AFRAID, and was stable at 100% for SAD). Whereas primarily experiencing sadness
in childhood during a representative simulation led to 0% accuracy for HAPPY,
continually varying accuracy for ANGRY and AFRAID (55% accuracy in the final 20
trials for each), and stable high accuracy for SAD (95% accuracy in final 20 trials).
Similar patterns of (highly variable) results were observed when performing the
same simulations with the other two emotions.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 43
Unlike the results shown in figure 8B – in which likelihood mappings were
fairly well acquired (and precise prior expectations for specific emotions hindered
correct inference) – poor performance was here explained primarily by poorly
acquired likelihood mappings (i.e., the content of the other emotions concepts was
often not learned). Figure 9 illustrates this by presenting the ‘A’ matrices learned by
the agent after childhoods dominated by either fear or sadness. As can be seen
there, the likelihood mappings do not strongly resemble the true mapping within
the generative process. These results in general support the notion that having
unrepresentative or insufficiently diverse early emotional experiences could hinder
later learning.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 44
Figure 9. Illustrates poorly learned emotion concepts (likelihood mappings or ‘A’ matrices) in adulthood
due to a childhood primarily characterized by either fear or sadness. This could be thought of as
simulating early adversity involving continual abuse or neglect, or perhaps cases of chronic depression.
See text for more details.
Maladaptive Attention Biases. To examine the second mechanism proposed by the
three-process model (involving maladaptive patterns in habitual attention
allocation), we equipped the model’s ‘E’ matrix with high prior expectations over
specific policies, which meant that it was 50 times more likely to attend to some
information and not to other information. This included: (i) an “external attention
bias,” where the agent had a strong habit of focusing on external stimuli (context)
and its beliefs about self- and other-blame; (ii) an “internal attention bias,” where
the agent had a strong habit of only attending to valence and arousal; and (iii) a
“somatic attention bias,” where the agent had a strong habit to attend only to its
arousal level and the approach vs. avoid modality.
Figure 10 shows how these different attentional biases promote false
inference. On the left, the true state is AFRAID, and the externally focused agent first
attends to the stimulus/context (social rejection) and then to its beliefs (other-
blame); however, without paying attention to its motivated action (avoid), it falsely
reports that it feels ANGRY instead of AFRAID (note that, following feedback, there
is a retrospective inference that afraid was more probable; similar retrospective
inferences after feedback are also shown in the other two examples in Figure 10). In
the middle, the true state is ANGRY, and the internally focused agent first attends to
valence (unpleasant) and then to arousal (high); however, without paying attention
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 45
to its action tendency (approach), it falsely reports that it is AFRAID. On the right,
the true state is SAD, and the somatically focused agent attends to its motivated
action (avoid) and to its arousal (high); however, without attending to its beliefs
(self-blame) it falsely reports that it is AFRAID instead of SAD.
Importantly, these false reports occur in an agent that has already acquired
very precise emotion concepts. Thus, this does not represent a failure to learn, but
simply the effect of having learned poor habits for mental action.
Figure 10. This figure illustrates single trial effects of different attentional biases, each promoting false
inference in a model that has already acquired precise emotion concepts (i.e., temperature parameter =
2 for both ‘A’ and ‘B’ matrices). External attention bias was implemented by giving the agent high prior
expectations (‘E’ matrix values) that she would attend to the context and to her beliefs. Internal
attention bias was implemented by giving the agent high prior expectations that she would attend to
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 46
valence and arousal. Somatic attention bias was implemented by giving the agent high prior
expectations that she would attend to arousal and action motivation. See the main text for a detailed
description of the false inferences displayed for each bias. Note: the bottom panels indicate posterior
beliefs, illustrating the agent’s retrospective beliefs at the end of the trial about her emotional state
throughout the trial. Also note that the agent’s actions in the upper left and upper right after reporting
should be ignored (i.e., they are simply an artifact of the trial continuing after the agent’s report, when
there is no goal and therefore no confidence in what to do).
The results of these examples were confirmed in simulations of 40
interleaved emotion trials (10 per emotion) in an agent who had already acquired
precise emotion concepts (temperature parameter = 2 for both ‘A’ and ‘B’ matrices;
no learning). In these simulations, we observed that the externally focused agent
had 100% accuracy for SAD, 10% accuracy for AFRAID, 100% accuracy for ANGRY,
and 60% accuracy for HAPPY. The internally focused agent had 100% accuracy for
SAD, 50% accuracy for AFRAID, 60% accuracy for ANGRY, and 100% accuracy for
HAPPY. The somatically focused agent had 10% accuracy for SAD, 100% accuracy
for AFRAID, 100% accuracy for ANGRY, and 0% accuracy for HAPPY. Thus, without
adaptive attentional habits, the agent was prone to misrepresent its emotions.
In our final simulations, we examined how learning these kinds of attentional
biases in childhood could hinder emotion concept learning. To do so, we used the
same learning procedure describe in section 3.1. However, in this case we simply
equipped the agent with the three different attentional biases (‘E’ matrix prior
distributions over policies) and assessed its ability to learn emotion concepts over
the 200 trials. The results of these simulations are provided in Figure 11. A somatic
attention bias primarily allowed the agent to learn two emotion concepts, which
corresponded to ANGER and FEAR. However, it is worth highlighting that the low
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 47
accuracy for the other emotions means that their respective patterns were
subsumed under the first two. Thus, it is more accurate to say that the agent learned
two affective concepts, which largely predicted only approach vs. avoidance. In
contrast, the internally biased agent easily acquired the distinction between
pleasant (HAPPY) and unpleasant emotions (all lumped into ANGER) and began to
learn a third concept that distinguished between low vs. high arousal (i.e., SAD vs.
ANGRY). However, it did not conceptualize the distinction between approach and
avoidance (i.e., ANGRY vs. AFRAID). Lastly, the externally focused agent was
somewhat labile in its concept acquisition; by the end, it could not predict approach
vs. avoidance, but it possessed externally focused concepts with content along the
lines of “the state I am in when I’m socially rejected and think it’s my fault vs.
someone else’s fault” (SAD vs. ANGRY) and “the state I am in when at a crowded
event” (HAPPY). These results provide strong support for the role of attentional
biases in subverting emotional awareness.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 48
Figure 11. Illustration of the simulated effects of each of the three attention biases (described in the
legend for Figure 10) on emotion concept learning over 200 trials (initialized with a model that
possessed a completely flat ‘A’ matrix likelihood distribution). Each bias induces aberrant learning in a
different way, often leading to the acquisition of two more coarse-grained emotion concepts as opposed
to the four fine-grained concepts distinguished in the generative process. See the main text for a detailed
description and interpretation.
Discussion
The active inference formulation of emotional processing we have presented
represents a first step toward the goal of building quantitative computational
models of the ability to learn, recognize, and understand (be “aware” of) one’s own
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 49
emotions. Although this is clearly a toy model, it does appear to offer some insights,
conceptual advances, and possible predictions.
First, in simulating differences in the precision (specificity) of emotion
concepts, some intuitive but interesting phenomena emerged. As would be
expected, differences in the specificity of the content of emotion concepts – here
captured by the precision of the likelihood mapping from states to outcomes (i.e.,
the precision of what pattern of outcomes each emotion concept predicted) – led to
differences in inferential accuracy. This suggests that, as would be expected, those
with more precise emotion concepts would show greater understanding of their
own affective responses. Perhaps less intuitively, beliefs about the stability of
emotion concepts – here captured by the precision of expected state transitions –
also influenced inferential accuracy. This predicts that a belief that emotional states
are more stable (less labile) over time would also facilitate one’s ability to correctly
infer what they are feeling. This appears consistent with the low levels of emotional
awareness or granularity observed in borderline personality disorder, a disorder
characterized by emotional instability (Levine et al., 1997; Suvak et al., 2011).
Next, in simulating emotion concept learning, a few interesting insights
emerged. Our simulations first confirmed that emotion concepts could successfully
be learned, even when their content was cast (as done here) as complex,
probabilistic, and highly overlapping response patterns across interoceptive,
proprioceptive, exteroceptive, and cognitive domains. This was true when all
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 50
emotion concepts needed to be learned simultaneously (as in childhood; see
(Hietanen, Glerean, Hari, & Nummenmaa, 2016; Widen & Russell, 2008)), and was
also true when a single new emotion concept was learned after others had already
been acquired (as in adulthood during psycho-educational therapeutic
interventions; e.g., see (Barlow et al., 2016; Burger et al., 2016; Hayes & Smith, 2005;
Lumley et al., 2017)).
These results depended on whether the observed outcomes during learning
were sufficiently precise and consistent. One finding worth highlighting was that
emotion concept learning was hindered when the precision of transitions among
emotional states was too low. This result may be relevant to previous empirical
results in populations known to show reduced understanding of emotional states,
such as those with autism (Erbas, Ceulemans, Boonen, Noens, & Kuppens, 2013;
Silani et al., 2008) and those who grow up in socially impoverished or otherwise
adverse (unpredictable) environments (Colvert et al., 2008; Lane et al., 2018). In
autism, it has been suggested that overly imprecise beliefs about state transitions
may hinder mental state learning, because such states require tracking abstract
behavioral patterns over long timescales (Haker, Schneebeli, & Stephan, 2016;
Lawson, Mathys, & Rees, 2017; Lawson, Rees, & Friston, 2014). Children who grow
up in impoverished environments may not have the opportunity to interact with
others to observe stable patterns in other’s affective responses; or receive feedback
about their own (Lane et al., 2018; Pears & Fisher, 2005; R. Smith, Killgore, et al.,
2018). Our results successfully reproduce these phenomena – which represent
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 51
important examples of mental state learning that may depend on consistently
observed outcome patterns that are relatively stable over time.
As emotion concepts are known to differ in different cultures (Russell, 1991),
our model and results may also relate to the learning mechanisms allowing for this
type of culture-specific emotion categorization learning. Specifically, the “correct”
and “incorrect” social feedback in our model could be understood as linguistic
feedback from others in one’s culture (e.g., a parent labeling emotional reactions for
a child using culture-specific categories). If this feedback is sufficiently precise, then
emotion concept learning could proceed effectively – even if the probabilistic
mapping from emotion categories to other perceptual outcomes is fairly imprecise
(i.e., which appears to be the case empirically; (Barrett, 2006, 2017)).
Another insight worth highlighting was that learning was more difficult when
the agent had already acquired previous concepts but entertained the possible
existence of new emotions it had not already learned. An interesting observation
was that, in some cases (e.g., learning SAD), new learning temporarily interfered
with old learning before being fully integrated into the agent’s cognitive repertoire
(an effect – termed retroactive interference – that has been extensively studied
empirically within learning and memory research; (Darby & Sloutsky, 2015;
Martínez, Villar, Ballarini, & Viola, 2014)). In the case of learning HAPPY, we found
that more extensive learning in the model’s “childhood” was necessary to prevent
this type of interference, with respect to previous acquisition of the concept SAD. A
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 52
second interesting observation was that AFRAID was very difficult to learn after the
other concepts were fully acquired. This appeared to be because the agent had
already learned to be highly confident about the explanatory power of her current
conceptual repertoire (combined with the fact that AFRAID had considerable
outcome overlap with SAD and ANGRY). It was necessary to provide the model with
a persistent “flooding” of observations consistent with the new emotion to reduce
its confidence sufficiently to acquire a new concept. It is not clear that this type of
flooding is realistic, but perhaps resembles the extended periods of fear that occur
during exposure-based behavioral therapies (Cooper, Clifton, & Feeny, 2017). We
should also emphasize that, due to the oversimplified nature of the mappings
between emotion concepts and affective response features in our simulations, the
difficulties observed in learning these specific emotions should not be taken too
seriously. However, these overall results do predict that emotion concept learning in
general should be more difficult in adulthood, and that emotion learning may have a
kind of “sensitive period” in childhood (as supported by previous empirical findings;
e.g., (Colvert et al., 2008; Pears & Fisher, 2005)).
The manner in which concept learning was implemented in these
simulations may also have more general implications (for considerations of this
approach to concept learning more generally, see (R. Smith, Schwartenbeck, Parr, &
Friston, 2019)). Typically in Active Inference simulations, the state space structure
of a model is specified in advance (e.g., (Mirza et al., 2016; Parr & Friston, 2017b;
Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald, Mathys, Dolan, & Friston, 2015)). Our model was instead
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 53
equipped with “blank” hidden states devoid of content (i.e., these states started out
predicting all outcomes with roughly equal probability in the simulated learning).
Over multiple exposures to the observed outcomes, these blank hidden states came
to acquire conceptual content that captured distinct statistical patterns in the lower-
level affective response components of the model. In some current neural process
theories (Bastos et al., 2012; Friston, FitzGerald, et al., 2017; Friston, Rosch, Parr,
Price, & Bowman, 2018; Parr & Friston, 2018), distinct cortical columns are
suggested to represent distinct hidden states. Under such theories, our learning
model would suggest that the brain might contain “reserve” cortical columns
available to capture new patterns of lower-level covariance if/when they begin to be
observed in interaction with the world. To our knowledge, no direct evidence of
such “reserve neurons” has been observed, although the generation of new neurons
(with new synaptic connections) is known to occur in the hippocampus (Chancey et
al., 2013). There is also the well-known phenomenon of “silent synapses” in the
brain, which can persist into adulthood and become activated when new learning
becomes necessary (e.g., see (Chancey et al., 2013; Funahashi, Maruyama,
Yoshimura, & Komatsu, 2013; Kerchner & Nicoll, 2008)). Another interesting
consideration is that, during sleep, it appears that many (but not all) synaptic
strength increases acquired in the previous day are attenuated (Tononi & Cirelli,
2014). This has been suggested to correspond to a process of Bayesian model
reduction, in which redundant model parameters are identified and removed to
prevent model over-fitting and promote selection of the most parsimonious model
that can successfully account for previous observations (Hobson & Friston, 2012).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 54
This also suggests that increases in “reserve” representational resources available
for state space expansion (as in concept learning) could perhaps occur after sleep. In
short, the acquisition of new concepts, emotion-related or otherwise, speaks to
important issues in structure learning. The approach used here offers one solution
to the question of how to expand a model, which could complement work on
strategies for reducing a model (Friston, Lin, et al., 2017).
Although the neural process theory associated with active inference is cast at
the level of canonical microcircuits and message passing, and therefore does not
make a priori predictions about the brain regions that implement the emotion-
related processes in our model, it nonetheless can afford empirical testing of macro-
anatomical correlates. That is, this process theory can be used to generate predicted
neural response time courses during emotional state inference and emotion concept
learning in our model, and the macro-anatomical correlates of these time courses
can then be established using neuroimaging methods. At present, the three-process
model (R. Smith, Killgore, et al., 2018), and supporting evidence (McRae et al., 2008;
R. Smith, Alkozei, et al., 2017; R. Smith et al., 2015; R. Smith, Kaszniak, et al., 2019; R.
Smith, Lane, Alkozei, et al., 2018; R. Smith, Lane, et al., 2017; R. Smith, Lane, Sanova,
et al., 2018; R. Smith, Quinlan, et al., 2019; R. Smith, Sanova, et al., 2018), has
identified a number of large-scale networks that plausibly implement the processes
we have simulated – and could therefore provide a priori hypotheses for future
studies along these lines (Barrett & Satpute, 2013; Yeo et al., 2011). For example,
“limbic network” regions (including orbitofrontal cortex and amygdala, among
others), “salience network” regions (including the anterior insula and dorsal
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 55
anterior cingulate, among other) and somatomotor/posterior insula regions all
appear to be involved in generating affective responses and representing either
visceral, somatic, or proprioceptive states at a perceptual level. Regions of the
paralimbic cortex (e.g., “default mode network,” with major hubs in the medial
prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate) are in turn most strongly implicated in
conceptual inference (Binder, Desai, Graves, & Conant, 2009) – such as the emotion
concept representation processes simulated here. Thus, activity in a number of
distinct brain regions/networks would be expected to show associations with
distinct belief updating processes in our model.
A final insight offered by our model pertains to the possibility that
maladaptive emotional state inference could be due to early experience. We
demonstrated this in two ways. First, we simulated exposure to a large number of
single emotion-provoking situations in childhood, promoting precise and highly
engrained prior expectations for being in a single emotional state, as well as
preferential learning of the respective outcome patterns for that state over others.
We found that different kinds of “unrepresentative” (single-emotion) outcome
patterns in early experience (e.g., chronic fear or sadness in childhood
abuse/neglect or sever chronic depression) prevented learning other emotion
concepts in somewhat inconsistent ways in repeated simulations. Overall, however,
these results supported the idea that later emotional state inferences and emotion
concept learning could be compromised by this type of maladaptive early
experience. This could potentially relate to cognitive bias learning, such as the
negative interpretation biases characteristic of mood and anxiety disorders (which
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 56
have been interpreted within computational frameworks; (Mogg & Bradley, 2005; R.
Smith, Akozei, Killgore, & Lane, 2017)).
Second, we examined the possibility that maladaptive cognitive habits could
hinder emotional awareness. Here, we demonstrated that such habits can promote
false emotional state inference and can hinder emotion concept learning.
Specifically, we found that different types of external, internal, and somatic biases
led to the acquisition of coarser-grained emotion concepts that failed to distinguish
between various elements of affective responses. Aside from its relevance to
cognitive biases more generally, these results could also explain certain empirical
phenomena in emotional awareness research, such as the finding that males tend to
score lower on emotional awareness measures than females (Wright et al., 2017).
Specifically, while a genetic contribution to such findings is possible, it is also known
that many cultures reinforce emotion avoidance in boys more than in girls in
childhood (Chaplin, Cole, & Zahn-Waxler, 2005; Diener & Lucas, 2004; Fivush,
Brotman, Buckner, & Goodman, 2000), and can promote beliefs that paying
attention to emotions is a sign of weakness or that emotional information simply
carries little pragmatic value. This type of learning could plausibly reinforce biased
patterns of attention similar to those simulated here. Thus, our simulations suggest
an interesting, testable mechanism by which such (potentially socialization-based)
differences may arise.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 57
In closing, it is important to note that this model is deliberately simple and is
meant only to represent a proof of principle that emotion inference and learning can
be modeled within a neurocomputational framework from first principles. We chose
a particular pattern of state-outcome mappings to simulate the content of emotion
concepts, but this is unlikely to represent a fully accurate depiction of human
emotion concepts or the outcomes they predict. Human emotion concepts likely
draw on much higher-dimensional patterns of somatic and visceral sensations,
behavioral motivations, and cognitive appraisal patterns. There are also “secondary”
emotion concepts like jealousy or embarrassment, which may require including
more specific context and appraisal observations in a model (e.g., observing a lover
with a competing suitor, observing oneself committing actions that break social
norms, etc.). Further, human agents (or at least some of them) are likely to have a
much richer space of both emotion and non-emotion concepts available for
explaining their patterns of internal experience in conjunction with other beliefs
and exteroceptive evidence (e.g., a pattern of low arousal, unpleasant valence, and
avoidance in many contexts could also be explained by the concept of sickness
rather than sadness; see (R. Smith, Lane, et al., 2019)). A more complete model
would take into account many different possible conceptual interpretations of this
sort. In addition, our simulations only attempted to capture the second process
within the three-process model (i.e., affective response representation; (R. Smith,
Killgore, et al., 2018)). Incorporating the other two processes (affective response
generation and conscious access) would undoubtedly induce additional dynamics
(including explicit brain-body interactions) that could alter or nuance the
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 58
simulation results we have provided. Modeling these additional processes will be an
important goal of future work (see (R. Smith, Lane, et al., 2019)).
A final more general limitation with this type of modeling is that, in its
current form, there are limited means of evaluating how well it represents the true
form of emotional state inference and emotion concept learning implemented in the
human brain. Here, we have focused on reproducing and validating a minimal model
that evinces emotional state inference and learning within the active inference
framework. Crucially, this model has – by construction – a construct validity with
the three-process model and associated empirical evidence. As noted above,
external validation of the model’s ability to capture human brain processes will be
an important next step, and can be done, for example, by examining whether the
simulated neural responses we have presented are observable within particular
brain regions during future neuroimaging studies of attending to – and reporting –
one’s own emotions (e.g., (Gusnard, Akbudak, Shulman, & Raichle, 2001; Lane, Fink,
Chua, & Dolan, 1997; R. Smith, Fass, & Lane, 2014; R. Smith, Lane, Alkozei, et al.,
2018; R. Smith, Lane, Sanova, et al., 2018)).
With these limitations in mind, however, this approach to computationally
modeling emotion-related processes appears promising with respect to the initial
insights it can offer. It can illustrate selective information integration in the service
of conceptual inference, it can successfully simulate concept learning and some of its
known vulnerabilities, and it can highlight maladaptive interactions between
cognitive habits, early experience, and the ability to understand and be aware of
one’s own emotions later in life, all of which may play important roles in the
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 59
development of emotional pathology. Finally, it highlights the potential for future
empirical work in which tasks could be adapted to the broad structure of such
models, which would allow investigation of individual differences in emotion
processing as well as its neural basis. In other words, once we have a validated
model of these emotion-related processes – at the subjective and neuronal level –
we can, in principle, fit the model to observed responses and thereby phenotype
subjects in terms of their emotion-related beliefs states (Schwartenbeck & Friston,
2016).
Software note
Although the generative model – specified by the various matrices described in this
paper – changes from application to application, the belief updates are generic and
can be implemented using standard routines (here spm_MDP_VB_X.m). These
routines are available as Matlab code in the latest version of SPM academic
software: http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/. The simulations in this paper can be
reproduced (and customized) via running the Matlab code included here in the
supplementary material (Emotion_learning_model.m).
References
Bagby, R., Parker, J., & Taylor, G. (1994a). The twenty-item Toronto Alexithymia
Scale—I. Item selection and cross-validation of the factor structure. Journal of
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 60
Psychosomatic Research, 38(1), 23–32.
Bagby, R., Parker, J., & Taylor, G. (1994b). The twenty-item Toronto Alexithymia
Scale—II. Convergent, discriminant, and concurrent validity. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 38(1), 33–40.
Barchard, K., & Hakstian, A. (2004). The nature and measurement of emotional
intelligence abilities; basic dimensions and their relationships with other
cognitive abilities and personality variables. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 64, 437–462.
Barlow, D., Allen, L., & Choate, M. (2016). Toward a Unified Treatment for Emotional
Disorders - Republished Article. Behavior Therapy, 47(6), 838–853.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2016.11.005
Barrett, L. (2006). Are Emotions Natural Kinds? Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1(1), 28–58. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6916.2006.00003.x
Barrett, L. (2017). How emotions are made: The secret life of the brain. New York:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Barrett, L., Mesquita, B., & Gendron, M. (2011). Context in Emotion Perception.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20(5), 286–290.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721411422522
Barrett, L., & Satpute, A. (2013). Large-scale brain networks in affective and social
neuroscience: towards an integrative functional architecture of the brain.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 23(3), 361–372.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2012.12.012
Barrett, L., & Simmons, W. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 61
Reviews. Neuroscience, 16(7), 419–429. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3950
Baslet, G., Termini, L., & Herbener, E. (2009). Deficits in emotional awareness in
schizophrenia and their relationship with other measures of functioning. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 197(9), 655.
Bastos, A., Usrey, W., Adams, R., Mangun, G., Fries, P., & Friston, K. (2012). Canonical
microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76(4), 695–711.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038
Berthoz, S., Ouhayoun, B., & Parage, N. (2000). Etude preliminaire des niveaux de
conscience emotionnelle chez des patients deprimes et des controles.
(Preliminary study of the levels of emotional awareness in depressed patients
and controls.). Annals of Medical Psychology (Paris), 158, 665–672.
Binder, J., Desai, R., Graves, W., & Conant, L. (2009). Where Is the Semantic System?
A Critical Review and Meta-Analysis of 120 Functional Neuroimaging Studies.
Cerebral Cortex, 19(12), 2767–2796. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhp055
Bréjard, V., Bonnet, A., & Pedinielli, J. (2012). The role of temperament and
emotional awareness in risk taking in adolescents. L’Encéphale: Revue de
Psychiatrie Clinique Biologique et Thérapeutique, 38(1), 1–9.
Brown, T. H., Zhao, Y., & Leung, V. (2010). Hebbian plasticity. In Encyclopedia of
Neuroscience (pp. 1049–1056). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-008045046-
9.00796-8
Burger, A., Lumley, M., Carty, J., Latsch, D., Thakur, E., Hyde-Nolan, M., … Schubiner,
H. (2016). The effects of a novel psychological attribution and emotional
awareness and expression therapy for chronic musculoskeletal pain: A
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 62
preliminary, uncontrolled trial. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 81, 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2015.12.003
Bydlowski, S., Corcos, M., Jeammet, P., Paterniti, S., Berthoz, S., Laurier, C., … Consoli,
S. (2005). Emotion-processing deficits in eating disorders. International Journal
of Eating Disorders, 37, 321–329.
Chancey, J., Adlaf, E., Sapp, M., Pugh, P., Wadiche, J., & Overstreet-Wadiche, L. (2013).
GABA depolarization is required for experience-dependent synapse unsilencing
in adult-born neurons. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the
Society for Neuroscience, 33(15), 6614–6622.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0781-13.2013
Chaplin, T., Cole, P., & Zahn-Waxler, C. (2005). Parental Socialization of Emotion
Expression: Gender Differences and Relations to Child Adjustment. Emotion,
5(1), 80–88. https://doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.5.1.80
Ciarrochi, J., Caputi, P., & Mayer, J. (2003). The distinctiveness and utility of a
measure of trait emotional awareness. Personality and Individual Differences,
34, 1477–1490.
Clark, J., Watson, S., & Friston, K. (2018). What is mood? A computational
perspective. Psychological Medicine, 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291718000430
Colvert, E., Rutter, M., Kreppner, J., Beckett, C., Castle, J., Groothues, C., … Sonuga-
Barke, E. (2008). Do Theory of Mind and Executive Function Deficits Underlie
the Adverse Outcomes Associated with Profound Early Deprivation?: Findings
from the English and Romanian Adoptees Study. Journal of Abnormal Child
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 63
Psychology, 36(7), 1057–1068. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-008-9232-x
Conant, C., & Ashbey, W. (1970). Every good regulator of a system must be a model
of that system. International Journal of Systems Science, 1(2), 89–97.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207727008920220
Consoli, S., Lemogne, C., Roch, B., Laurent, S., Plouin, P., & Lane, R. (2010).
Differences in emotion processing in patients with essential and secondary
hypertension. American Journal of Hypertension, 23, 515–521.
Cooper, A. A., Clifton, E. G., & Feeny, N. C. (2017, August 1). An empirical review of
potential mediators and mechanisms of prolonged exposure therapy. Clinical
Psychology Review, Vol. 56, pp. 106–121.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2017.07.003
Darby, K., & Sloutsky, V. (2015). The cost of learning: interference effects in memory
development. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General, 144(2), 410–431.
https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000051
de Berker, A., Rutledge, R., Mathys, C., Marshall, L., Cross, G., Dolan, R., & Bestmann, S.
(2016). Computations of uncertainty mediate acute stress responses in
humans. Nature Communications, 7, 10996.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10996
Diener, M., & Lucas, R. (2004). Adults Desires for Childrens Emotions across 48
Countries: Associations with Individual and National Characteristics. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 35(5), 525–547.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022104268387
Donges, U., Kersting, A., Dannlowski, U., Lalee-Mentzel, J., Arolt, V., & Suslow, T.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 64
(2005). Reduced awareness of others’ emotions in unipolar depressed patients.
The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 193(5), 331–337.
Erbas, Y., Ceulemans, E., Boonen, J., Noens, I., & Kuppens, P. (2013). Emotion
differentiation in autism spectrum disorder. Research in Autism Spectrum
Disorders, 7(10), 1221–1227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2013.07.007
Fivush, R., Brotman, M., Buckner, J., & Goodman, S. (2000). Gender Differences in
Parent–Child Emotion Narratives. Sex Roles, 42(3), 233–253.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007091207068
Frewen, P., Lane, R., Neufeld, R., Densmore, M., Stevens, T., & Lanius, R. (2008).
Neural correlates of levels of emotional awareness during trauma script-
imagery in posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychosomatic Medicine, 70(1), 27–
31.
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O Doherty, J., & Pezzulo, G.
(2016). Active inference and learning. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,
68, 862–879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active
Inference: A Process Theory. Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49.
https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., Lin, M., Frith, C., Pezzulo, G., Hobson, J., & Ondobaka, S. (2017). Active
Inference, Curiosity and Insight. Neural Computation, 29(10), 2633–2683.
https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_00999
Friston, K., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical brain: Belief propagation
and active inference. Network Neuroscience, 1(4), 381–414.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 65
https://doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018
Friston, K., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2018). Deep temporal models
and active inference. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 90, 486–501.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2018.04.004
Funahashi, R., Maruyama, T., Yoshimura, Y., & Komatsu, Y. (2013). Silent synapses
persist into adulthood in layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons of visual cortex in dark-
reared mice. Journal of Neurophysiology, 109(8), 2064–2076.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00912.2012
Gusnard, D., Akbudak, E., Shulman, G., & Raichle, M. (2001). Medial prefrontal cortex
and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(7), 4259–4264.
Haker, H., Schneebeli, M., & Stephan, K. (2016). Can Bayesian Theories of Autism
Spectrum Disorder Help Improve Clinical Practice? Frontiers in Psychiatry, 7,
107. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00107
Harmon-Jones, E., Gable, P., & Peterson, C. (2010). The role of asymmetric frontal
cortical activity in emotion-related phenomena: A review and update. Biological
Psychology, 84(3), 451–462.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOPSYCHO.2009.08.010
Hayes, S., & Smith, S. (2005). Get Out of Your Mind and Into Your Life: The New
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger
Publications.
Hietanen, J., Glerean, E., Hari, R., & Nummenmaa, L. (2016). Bodily maps of emotions
across child development. Developmental Science, 19(6), 1111–1118.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 66
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12389
Hobson, J., & Friston, K. (2012). Waking and dreaming consciousness:
neurobiological and functional considerations. Progress in Neurobiology, 98(1),
82–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.05.003
Hohwy, J. (2016). The Self-Evidencing Brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285.
https://doi.org/10.1111/nous.12062
Joffily, M., & Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional Valence and the Free-Energy Principle.
PLoS Computational Biology, 9(6), e1003094.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094
Kashdan, T., Barrett, L., & McKnight, P. (2015). Unpacking Emotion Differentiation:
Transforming Unpleasant Experience by Perceiving Distinctions in Negativity.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24(1), 10–16.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721414550708
Kashdan, T., & Farmer, A. (2014). Differentiating emotions across contexts:
comparing adults with and without social anxiety disorder using random, social
interaction, and daily experience sampling. Emotion, 14(3), 629–638.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0035796
Kerchner, G., & Nicoll, R. (2008). Silent synapses and the emergence of a
postsynaptic mechanism for LTP. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 9(11), 813–
825. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2501
Kleckner, I., Zhang, J., Touroutoglou, A., Chanes, L., Xia, C., Simmons, W., … Barrett, L.
(2017). Evidence for a Large-Scale Brain System Supporting Allostasis and
Interoception in Humans. Nature Human Behaviour, 1, 0069.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 67
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-017-0069
Lackner, J. (2005). Is IBS a problem of emotion dysregulation? Testing the levels of
emotional awareness model. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
Psychosomatic Society.
Lane, R., Anderson, F., & Smith, R. (2018). Biased Competition Favoring Physical
Over Emotional Pain: A Possible Explanation for the Link Between Early
Adversity and Chronic Pain. Psychosomatic Medicine, 80(9), 880–890.
https://doi.org/10.1097/PSY.0000000000000640
Lane, R., Fink, G., Chua, P., & Dolan, R. (1997). Neural activation during selective
attention to subjective emotional responses. Neuroreport, 8(18), 3969–3972.
Lane, R., Quinlan, D., Schwartz, G., Walker, P., & Zeitlin, S. (1990). The Levels of
Emotional Awareness Scale: a cognitive-developmental measure of emotion.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 55(1–2), 124–134.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00223891.1990.9674052
Lane, R., & Schwartz, G. (1987). Levels of emotional awareness: a cognitive-
developmental theory and its application to psychopathology. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 144, 133–143.
Lane, R., Sechrest, L., Reidel, R., Weldon, V., Kaszniak, A., & Schwartz, G. (1996).
Impaired verbal and nonverbal emotion recognition in alexithymia.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 58(3), 203–210.
Lane, R., Sechrest, L., Riedel, R., Shapiro, D., & Kaszniak, A. (2000). Pervasive emotion
recognition deficit common to alexithymia and the repressive coping style.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 62, 492–501.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 68
Lane, R., Weihs, K., Herring, A., Hishaw, A., & Smith, R. (2015). Affective agnosia:
Expansion of the alexithymia construct and a new opportunity to integrate and
extend Freud’s legacy. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 55, 594–611.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.06.007
Lawson, R., Mathys, C., & Rees, G. (2017). Adults with autism overestimate the
volatility of the sensory environment. Nature Neuroscience, 20(9), 1293–1299.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4615
Lawson, R., Rees, G., & Friston, K. (2014). An aberrant precision account of autism.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 302.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00302
Levine, D., Marziali, E., & Hood, J. (1997). Emotion processing in borderline
personality disorders. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 185, 240–246.
Licata, M., Kristen, S., & Sodian, B. (2016). Mother-Child Interaction as a Cradle of
Theory of Mind: The Role of Maternal Emotional Availability. Social
Development, 25(1), 139–156. https://doi.org/10.1111/sode.12131
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2018). “Seeing the Dark”: Grounding Phenomenal
Transparency and Opacity in Precision Estimation for Active Inference.
Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 643. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00643
Lindquist, K., & Barrett, L. (2008). Constructing emotion: the experience of fear as a
conceptual act. Psychological Science, 19(9), 898–903.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02174.x
Lumley, M., Schubiner, H., Lockhart, N., Kidwell, K., Harte, S., Clauw, D., & Williams, D.
(2017). Emotional awareness and expression therapy, cognitive behavioral
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 69
therapy, and education for fibromyalgia: a cluster-randomized controlled trial.
Pain, 158(12), 2354–2363. https://doi.org/10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001036
Martínez, M., Villar, M. E., Ballarini, F., & Viola, H. (2014). Retroactive interference of
object-in-context long-term memory: Role of dorsal hippocampus and medial
prefrontal cortex. Hippocampus, 24(12), 1482–1492.
https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.22328
McKay, R., & Dennett, D. (2009). The evolution of misbelief. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 32(06), 493. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X09990975
McRae, K., Reiman, E., Fort, C., Chen, K., & Lane, R. (2008). Association between trait
emotional awareness and dorsal anterior cingulate activity during emotion is
arousal-dependent. NeuroImage, 41(2), 648–655.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.02.030
Metzinger, T. (2017). The Problem of Mental Action. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese.
(Eds.), Philosophy and Predicitive Processing.
Mirza, M., Adams, R., Mathys, C., & Friston, K. (2016). Scene Construction, Visual
Foraging, and Active Inference. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 10, 56.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2016.00056
Moeller, S., Konova, A., Parvaz, M., Tomasi, D., Lane, R., Fort, C., … RZ, G. (2014).
Functional, Structural, and Emotional Correlates of Impaired Insight in Cocaine
Addiction. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(1), 61.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.2833
Mogg, K., & Bradley, B. (2005). Attentional Bias in Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Versus Depressive Disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29(1), 29–45.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 70
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-005-1646-y
Mumme, D., Fernald, A., & Herrera, C. (1996). Infants’ Responses to Facial and Vocal
Emotional Signals in a Social Referencing Paradigm. Child Development, 67(6),
3219–3237. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.1996.tb01910.x
Panksepp, J., & Biven, L. (2012). The Archaeology of Mind: Neuroevolutionary Origins
of Human Emotions. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Panksepp, J., Lane, R., Solms, M., & Smith, R. (2017). Reconciling cognitive and
affective neuroscience perspectives on the brain basis of emotional experience.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 76, part B, 187–215.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.09.010
Parker, J., Taylor, G., & Bagby, R. (2003). The 20-Item Toronto Alexithymia Scale: III.
Reliability and factorial validity in a community population. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 55(3), 269–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-
3999(02)00578-0
Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2017a). Uncertainty, epistemics and active inference. Journal
of the Royal Society, Interface, 14(136). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0376
Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2017b). Working memory, attention, and salience in active
inference. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 14678. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
017-15249-0
Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2018). The Anatomy of Inference: Generative Models and
Brain Structure. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 12, 90.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2018.00090
Pears, K., & Fisher, P. (2005). Emotion understanding and theory of mind among
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 71
maltreated children in foster care: Evidence of deficits. Development and
Psychopathology, 17(01), 47–65.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579405050030
Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., & Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: Why it causes
diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Progress in Neurobiology, 156,
164–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PNEUROBIO.2017.05.004
Posner, M. (2016). Orienting of attention: Then and now. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology (2006), 69(10), 1864–1875.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2014.937446
Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L., Dascola, I., & Umiltá, C. (1987). Reorienting attention across
the horizontal and vertical meridians: Evidence in favor of a premotor theory of
attention. Neuropsychologia, 25(1), 31–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/0028-
3932(87)90041-8
Russell, J. (1991). Culture and the categorization of emotions. Psychological Bulletin,
110(3), 426–450. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.110.3.426
Russell, J. (2003). Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion.
Psychological Review, 110(1), 145–172.
Scherer, K. (2009). The dynamic architecture of emotion: Evidence for the
component process model. Cognition & Emotion, 23(7), 1307–1351.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02699930902928969
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., & Friston, K. (2015). The
Dopaminergic Midbrain Encodes the Expected Certainty about Desired
Outcomes. Cerebral Cortex, 25(10), 3434–3445.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 72
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu159
Schwartenbeck, P., & Friston, K. (2016). Computational Phenotyping in Psychiatry: A
Worked Example. ENeuro, 3(4), ENEURO.0049-0016.2016.
https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0049-16.2016
Seth, A. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 17(11), 565–573.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Seth, A., & Friston, K. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences,
371(1708).
Sharot, T. (2011). The optimism bias. Current Biology, 21(23), R941–R945.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CUB.2011.10.030
Siemer, M., Mauss, I., & Gross, J. (2007). Same situation--Different emotions: How
appraisals shape our emotions. Emotion, 7(3), 592–600.
https://doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.592
Silani, G., Bird, G., Brindley, R., Singer, T., Frith, C., & Frith, U. (2008). Levels of
emotional awareness and autism : An fMRI study Levels of emotional
awareness and autism : An fMRI study. Psychology, 3(2), 97–112.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470910701577020
Smith, D., & Schenk, T. (2012). The Premotor theory of attention: Time to move on?
Neuropsychologia, 50(6), 1104–1114.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUROPSYCHOLOGIA.2012.01.025
Smith, R. (2019). The three-process model of implicit and explicit emotion. In R.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 73
Lane & L. Nadel (Eds.), Neuroscience of Enduring Change: Implications for
Psychotherapy (p. (in press)). Oxford University Press.
Smith, R., Akozei, A., Killgore, W., & Lane, R. (2017). Nested Positive Feedback Loops
in the Maintenance of Major Depression: An integration and extension of
previous models. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, (In Press).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2017.09.011
Smith, R., Alkozei, A., Bao, J., Smith, C., Lane, R., & Killgore, W. (2017). Resting state
functional connectivity correlates of emotional awareness. NeuroImage, 159,
99–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.07.044
Smith, R., Bajaj, S., Dailey, N., Alkozei, A., Smith, C., Sanova, A., … Killgore, W. (2018).
Greater cortical thickness within the limbic visceromotor network predicts
higher levels of trait emotional awareness. Consciousness and Cognition, 57, 54–
61.
Smith, R., Braden, B., Chen, K., Ponce, F., Lane, R., & Baxter, L. (2015). The neural
basis of attaining conscious awareness of sad mood. Brain Imaging and
Behavior, 9(3), 574–587. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682-014-9318-8
Smith, R., Fass, H., & Lane, R. (2014). Role of medial prefrontal cortex in
representing one’s own subjective emotional responses: A preliminary study.
Consciousness and Cognition, 29, 117–130.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2014.08.002
Smith, R., Kaszniak, A., Katsanis, J., Lane, R., & Nielsen, L. (2019). The importance of
identifying underlying process abnormalities in alexithymia: Implications of the
three-process model and a single case study illustration. Consciousness and
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 74
Cognition, 68, 33–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CONCOG.2018.12.004
Smith, R., Killgore, W., & Lane, R. (2018). The structure of emotional experience and
its relation to trait emotional awareness: A theoretical review. Emotion, 18(5),
670–692. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000376
Smith, R., & Lane, R. (2015). The neural basis of one’s own conscious and
unconscious emotional states. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 57, 1–
29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.08.003
Smith, R., & Lane, R. (2016). Unconscious emotion: A cognitive neuroscientific
perspective. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 69, 216–238.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.08.013
Smith, R., Lane, R., Alkozei, A., Bao, J., Smith, C., Sanova, A., … Killgore, W. (2017).
Maintaining the feelings of others in working memory is associated with
activation of the left anterior insula and left frontal-parietal control network.
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12(5), 848–860.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsx011
Smith, R., Lane, R., Alkozei, A., Bao, J., Smith, C., Sanova, A., … Killgore, W. (2018). The
role of medial prefrontal cortex in the working memory maintenance of one’s
own emotional responses. Scientific Reports, 8.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-21896-8
Smith, R., Lane, R., Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2019). Neurocomputational mechanisms
underlying emotional awareness: insights afforded by deep active inference
and their potential clinical relevance. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews.
https://doi.org/10.1101/681288
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 75
Smith, R., Lane, R., Sanova, A., Alkozei, A., Smith, C., & Killgore, W. W. D. (2018).
Common and Unique Neural Systems Underlying the Working Memory
Maintenance of Emotional vs. Bodily Reactions to Affective Stimuli: The
Moderating Role of Trait Emotional Awareness. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 12, 370. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00370
Smith, R., Quinlan, D., Schwartz, G. E., Sanova, A., Alkozei, A., & Lane, R. D. (2019).
Developmental Contributions to Emotional Awareness. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 101(2), 150–158.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00223891.2017.1411917
Smith, R., Sanova, A., Alkozei, A., Lane, R., & Killgore, W. (2018). Higher levels of trait
emotional awareness are associated with more efficient global information
integration throughout the brain: a graph-theoretic analysis of resting state
functional connectivity. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 13(7), 665–
675. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsy047
Smith, R., Schwartenbeck, P., Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2019). An active inference
approach to modeling structure learning: concept learning as an example case.
BioRxiv, 633677. https://doi.org/10.1101/633677
Smith, R., Thayer, J., Khalsa, S., & Lane, R. (2017). The hierarchical basis of
neurovisceral integration. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 75, 274–
296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.02.003
Smith, R., Weihs, K., Alkozei, A., Killgore, W., & Lane, R. (2019). An embodied
neurocomputational framework for organically integrating biopsychosocial
processes: An application to the role of social support in health and disease.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 76
Psychosomatic Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1097/PSY.0000000000000661
Subic-Wrana, A., Beetz, M., Paulussen, J., Wiltnik, J., & Beutel, M. (2007). Relations
between attachment, childhood trauma, and emotional awareness in
psychosomatic inpatients. Budapest, Hungary.
Subic-Wrana, C., Bruder, S., Thomas, W., Lane, R., & Köhle, K. (2005). Emotional
awareness deficits in inpatients of a psychosomatic ward: a comparison of two
different measures of alexithymia. Psychosomatic Medicine, 67(3), 483–489.
Suvak, M., Litz, B., Sloan, D., Zanarini, M., Barrett, L., & Hofmann, S. (2011). Emotional
granularity and borderline personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 120(2), 414–426. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021808
Tononi, G., & Cirelli, C. (2014). Sleep and the Price of Plasticity: From Synaptic and
Cellular Homeostasis to Memory Consolidation and Integration. Neuron, 81(1),
12–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEURON.2013.12.025
Widen, S., & Russell, J. (2008). Children acquire emotion categories gradually.
Cognitive Development, 23(2), 291–312.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2008.01.002
Wilson-Mendenhall, C., Barrett, L., Simmons, W., & Barsalou, L. (2011). Grounding
emotion in situated conceptualization. Neuropsychologia, 49(5), 1105–1127.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.12.032
Wright, R., Riedel, R., Sechrest, L., Lane, R., & Smith, R. (2017). Sex differences in
emotion recognition ability: The mediating role of trait emotional awareness.
Motivation and Emotion. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-017-9648-0
Yeo, B., Krienen, F., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., …
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Simulating Emotions 77
Buckner, R. (2011). The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by
intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 106(3), 1125–
1165. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00338.2011
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/640813; this version posted December 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.