Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
A World unto Itself: Human Communication as Active Inference
Jared Vasil1 (jared.vasil@duke.edu)
Paul B. Badcock2,3,4 (pbadcock@unimelb.edu.au)
Axel Constant5,6,7 (axel.constant.pruvost@gmail.com)
Karl Friston7 (k.friston@ucl.ac.uk)
Maxwell J. D. Ramstead6,7,8,9 (maxwell.d.ramstead@gmail.com)
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
1. Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA, 27708.
2. Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3052.
3. Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia, 3010.
4. Orygen, the National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, Melbourne, Australia,
3052.
5. Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW 2006, Australia.
6. Culture, Mind, and Brain Program, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
7. Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, UK,
WC1N3BG.
8. Department of Philosophy, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
9. Division of Social and Transcultural Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Keywords: cooperative communication, mental state alignment, evolution, development, active
inference, adaptive prior, free energy, circular causality
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR
Jared Vasil
Email: jared.vasil@duke.edu
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
WORD COUNT: 15,995 (main text, footnotes, figures); 14,226 (main text, footnotes); 13,037
(main text)
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Abstract (342 words)
Recent theoretical work in developmental psychology suggests that humans are predisposed to
align their mental states with those of other individuals. One way this manifests is in cooperative
communication; that is, intentional communication aimed at aligning individuals’ mental states
with respect to events in their shared environment. This idea has received strong empirical support.
The purpose of this paper is to extend this account by proposing an integrative model of the
biobehavioral dynamics of cooperative communication. Our formulation is based on active
inference. Active inference suggests that action-perception cycles operate to minimize uncertainty
and optimize an individual’s internal model of the world. We propose that humans are
characterized by an evolved adaptive prior belief that their mental states are aligned with, or
similar to, those of conspecifics (i.e., that ‘we are the same sort of creature, inhabiting the same
sort of niche’). The use of cooperative communication emerges as the principal means to gather
evidence for this belief, allowing for the development of a shared narrative that is used to
disambiguate interactants’ (hidden and inferred) mental states. Thus, by using cooperative
communication, individuals effectively attune to a hermeneutic niche composed, in part, of others’
mental states; and, reciprocally, attune the niche to their own ends via epistemic niche construction.
This means that niche construction enables features of the niche to encode precise, reliable cues
about the deontic or shared value of certain action policies (e.g., the utility of using communicative
constructions to disambiguate mental states, given expectations about shared prior beliefs). In turn,
the alignment of mental states (prior beliefs) enables the emergence of a novel, contextualizing
scale of cultural dynamics that encompasses the actions and mental states of the ensemble of
interactants and their shared environment. The dynamics of this contextualizing layer of cultural
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
organization feedback, across scales, to constrain the variability of the prior expectations of the
individuals who constitute it. Our theory additionally builds upon the active inference literature by
introducing a new set of neurobiologically plausible computational hypotheses for cooperative
communication. We conclude with directions for future research.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
“The point we emphasize is strong confidence in our original nature,” Suzuki (1970/2014, p. 35)
Introduction
An influential body of recent work on human communication describes it as cooperative
communication. Cooperative communication is defined as intentional communication aimed at the
alignment of mental states between conspecifics (reviewed in Tomasello, 2008, 2014, 2019). This
is thought to be one particularly important behavioral manifestation of a broader, species-typical
motivation to align mental states with those of others (Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, & Moll,
2005). Some have hypothesized that this motivation is the result of selective pressures acting on
human evolution in the context of interdependent collaborative foraging (Tomasello, Melis,
Tennie, Wyman, & Herrmann, 2012; Whiten & Erdal, 2012). In scenarios where individuals in a
group must forage together for resources (food, water, information, etc.), the alignment of multiple
individuals’ goals, intentions, and attentional processes is necessary for success (e.g., Liebenberg,
2006). This view has been useful for empirical investigation in developmental and comparative
psychology (reviewed in Call, 2009; Carpenter & Liebal, 2011; MacLean, 2016).
The purpose of this narrative review is to extend the approach to cooperative
communication introduced above by leveraging a recent active inference formulation in theoretical
neuroscience and biology (Friston, 2012, 2013). This formulation of living systems provides a
formal account of the dynamics of belief-guided, embodied action from first principles of
biological self-organization (e.g., Friston, Sengupta, & Auletta, 2014; Sengupta et al., 2016). A
formal account is arguably important, because it forces one to make explicit one’s theoretical
predictions in experimental and modelling work that investigates the usage, development, and
cultural evolution of human communication (e.g., Christiansen & Kirby, 2003; McCauley &
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Christiansen, 2014). Furthermore, and although this is not the primary focus of this work, by
proposing an active inference formulation of cooperative communication, we pave the way for a
set of well specified predictions about the neurocomputational dynamics underwriting cooperative
communication (Friston, 2010; e.g., Adams, Shipp, & Friston, 2013; Bastos et al., 2012; Parr &
Friston, 2017, 2018). This is important, as precisely formulated neuroscientific hypotheses are
largely absent from extant work on cooperative communication.
In brief, active inference is a mathematical formulation of the tendency of living systems
to maintain themselves in a restricted set of states (i.e., their phenotypic states) while embedded in
a fluctuating, partially observed environment (Friston, 2012, 2013). More precisely, active
inference formalizes the structure of exchanges between organisms (individuals and groups) and
their environment by explaining how the structure and function of organisms and their ecological
niches become attuned to, or predictive of, each other (Bruineberg, Kiverstein, & Rietveld, 2018).
In short, active inference suggests that every organism optimizes its internal (generative) model of
the world via circular or self-fulfilling action-perception cycles that minimize an upper bound on
biophysical surprise (i.e., variational free-energy). In turn, the environment becomes attuned to the
organisms that inhabit it (Constant et al., 2019). We will see later that this is formally equivalent
to maximizing the evidence for internal or generative models of the world – and that when the
world (e.g., the cultural niche) is ‘shared,’ then the generative models of its denizens become
committed to a (reliably) shared narrative.
Following a recent hypothesis of the embodied human brain derived from active inference,
called the hierarchically mechanistic mind (Badcock, Friston, & Ramstead, 2019; Badcock,
Friston, Ramstead, Ploeger, & Hohwy, 2019), our proposal combines active inference with
substantive research in psychology and allied disciplines that captures the specific evolutionary,
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
developmental, and real-time dynamics that underlie the human capacity for cooperative
communication.
A key corollary of this approach is the construct of an adaptive prior (Badcock et al.,
2019a,b). Adaptive priors are evolutionarily endowed, heritable beliefs1 that guide characteristic
patterns of cognition and behavior in conspecifics. In other words, adaptive priors have been
shaped by selection to steer action-perception cycles toward adaptive, unsurprising outcomes
(Badcock et al., 2019a; 2019b; Ramstead et al., 2018). Such priors depend upon genetic,
epigenetic, and/or cultural inheritance, and often incorporate learned, empirical priors gleaned
from experience to allow for sensitive adaptation to the local environment (Badcock et al., 2019b).
Stated otherwise, adaptive priors effectively constrain the space of prior beliefs learned during
ontogeny to enable adaptive action in local cultural niches (Badcock et al., 2019b; Ramstead,
Constant, Veissière, & Friston, 2019).
Our proposal is as follows. We suggest that natural selection has endowed humans with an
adaptive prior for alignment; i.e., an adaptive prior preference for action policies that generate
sensory evidence that reliably indicates that their own mental states are aligned with, or similar to,
those of conspecifics. This adaptive prior fosters intentional, patterned action sequences that gather
evidence (i.e., sensory observations) for this belief; that is, that gather evidence for the hypothesis
that ‘we are the same kind of creature, inhabiting the same kind of niche.’ The adaptive prior here
functions to bias action and inference by leading agents to actively sample their sensorium in a
way that, on average and over time, disambiguates conspecifics’ (hidden) mental states. This
sampling process is therefore guided by, and generates evidence for, the belief that our mental
1 Crucial to our account, in the active inference formulation ‘beliefs’ refer to (subpersonal) Bayesian beliefs – in the
sense of Bayesian belief updating or belief propagation (as opposed to propositional beliefs).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
states are aligned. In short, we cast cooperative communication as an evidence gathering process;
indeed, one that extends across temporally nested scales of analysis. The existence of this process
follows from, and only from, an adaptive prior specifying the alignment of individuals’ mental
states2. Cooperative communication can thus be cast as a self-fulfilling prophecy, driven by the
belief that we are alike. This belief is then characteristically reinforced by the evidence generated
by belief-guided communication.
Shweder and Sullivan wrote that “cultural psychology endeavors to understand how such
divergences [in the processes that underwrite consciousness] relate to acts of interpretation and to
the socially constructed meaning or representation of stimulus events” (1993, p. 506). The present
article contributes to the project of cultural psychology and neuroscience (e.g., Han, 2015; and
articles in the present collection) by explaining how a cultural milieu can shape and direct the
dynamics of individual minds; and, in turn, how individual minds can shape their cultural milieu.
We do this by providing an account of sociocultural cognition based on a shared adaptive prior for
alignment, drawing on the active inference formulation. In turn, we argue that how one’s cultural
experience manifests in any given time and place – the particular tools one that uses in coming to
grips with their world (i.e., words, gestures, and concepts) – is dependent on the history and current
contingencies of one’s culture and the minds, practices, and places that make it up.
The structure of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In order for readers to appreciate
the broader context that underscores our proposal, we devote our second section to a review of
some of the key phenomena that underwrite cooperative communication, as emphasized by other
theorists to date. In the third section, we introduce relevant aspects of active inference, illustrated
2 On a deflationary view, this is the only solution that can exist, in terms of minimising the surprise or free energy of
coupled free energy minimising agents. See below and Friston, Levin, Sengupta, & Pezzulo (2015) for a fuller
discussion in the context of pattern formation.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
by examples drawn from studies of cooperative communication. In the fourth section, we leverage
the background provided in the second and third sections to argue that human species-typical
adaptive priors prescribe the alignment of one’s mental states with those of conspecifics. This latter
argument is presented in three subsections. The first subsection focuses on real-time dynamics
(i.e., interaction) from the perspectives of an individual and dyad, respectively; the second focuses
on ontogeny; and the third focuses on the timescale of cultural evolution. Our paper concludes
with a few comments about the limitations of the current proposal of an adaptive prior for
alignment. This is complemented with suggested directions for future research.
Theoretical Background
The evolutionary origins of cooperative communication
Evolutionarily selected ‘mutual expectations of cooperativeness’ are thought to motivate
the usage of cooperative communication (Tomasello, 2014). From the perspective of evolutionary
biology, these expectations can be explained by considering the selective contexts that favored
them. One promising candidate is so-called obligate collaborative foraging (Tomasello et al.,
2012), where adaptive success in securing food and other resources is marked by a necessary
dependence on cooperation with others (also, Baumard, André, & Sperber, 2013). For instance, in
mutualistic ‘stag hunt’ games, a single individual is necessary to obtain a low risk, but low reward,
food item (a hare), but two individuals are necessary to obtain a high risk, but high reward, food
item (a stag). Here, collaboration appears as the riskier, but more rewarding, option3. It is riskier
3 In the active inference formulation, below, collaboration is ‘rewarding’ in the sense of maximising a shared or
prosocial utility Devaine, M., Hollard, G., Daunizeau, J., 2014. Theory of Mind: Did Evolution Fool Us? PLOS
ONE 9, e87619, Yoshida, W., Dolan, R.J., Friston, K.J., 2008. Game theory of mind. PLoS Comput Biol 4,
e1000254..
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
because, to cooperate effectively, the would-be partners must somehow align their mental states –
their goals, intentions, and attention (Skyrms, 2001). Cooperative communication is thereby
favored as a means to intentionally bring about the alignment of mental states. For instance, in
high risk stag hunt scenarios preschool children communicated more, and more often, relative to
low risk situations (Duguid, Wyman, Bullinger, Herfurth-Majstorovic, & Tomasello, 2014). Such
joint foraging scenarios may point towards an important and recurrent aspect of the early selective
pressures that favored the motivations and skills underlying cooperative communication
(McLoone & Smead, 2014).
Research examining the communicative behavior of extant non-human primates is crucial
for understanding the evolutionarily nascent form of modern humans’ communicative motivations
and skills (Call & Tomasello, 2007; Mitani, 2009). Such work suggests that, generally speaking,
the motivation and skills of non-human primates for intentional communication may have been
gradually ‘cooperativized’ across human evolution (Tomasello, 2014); that is, exapted for both
cooperative and competitive purposes with conspecifics. This trajectory may have begun with the
usage of gestural communication geared towards simply eliciting specific responses from certain
individuals (Call & Tomasello, 2007). For instance, something like ritualized great ape ‘attention
grabbers’ – where an individual has learned that (for a certain conspecific) an action like slapping
the ground loudly will likely bring about a desired state of the world (e.g., the initiation of play;
Tomasello, 2008) – may have been the evolutionary precursor to certain manifestations of
cooperative communication, like declarative pointing (Tomasello, 2019). Indeed, the motivational
component is key (Rekers, Haun, & Tomasello, 2011): human-raised non-human great apes will
occasionally point for humans (though never for conspecifics). However, they only do this
‘selfishly,’ that is, only when they expect the gesture to cause the individual to (say) get an out-of-
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
reach object for the ape (Bullinger, Zimmermann, Kaminski, & Tomasello, 2011). In contrast, with
cooperative communication, the underlying motive is argued to be ‘fundamentally’ cooperative
(Tomasello, 2019); that is, from the onset of cooperative communication in ontogeny, human
infants only appear satisfied following a communicative bid when their communicative partner
has aligned their mental states with their own, with respect to the infant’s intended referent
(reviewed in Carpenter & Liebal, 2011; for comparative considerations, see Carpenter & Call,
2013).
The developmental origins of cooperative communication
Human infants begin to use cooperative communication to align and coordinate mental
states at nine to twelve months of age (Carpenter, Nagell, & Tomasello, 1998). This window of
emergence in ontogeny is strongly maturationally constrained (Matthews, Behne, Lieven, &
Tomasello, 2012), as evidenced by the emergence of communicative pointing at this age in every
cultural setting studied (Callaghan et al., 2011; Lieven & Stoll, 2013; Liszkowski et al., 2012).
One way this manifests initially is in declarative pointing gestures directed towards referents in
the immediate environment. Experimental work suggests that the goal of infants’ communication
in such cases is to mutually align emotions, attitudes, and/or thoughts about a referent with another
individual (Tomasello, Carpenter, & Liszkowski, 2007; e.g., Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello,
2007; Liszkowski, Schäfer, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2009). Consistent with this, infants become
disgruntled when others ignore their communicative bids for alignment. For instance, Liszkowski
et al. (2004) found that infants became unsatisfied with uncooperative adults who ignored infants’
communicative bids, who did not provide an emotional response symmetrical to the infant’s, and
who did not shift the focus of their attention back and forth between the infant and their referent.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
This suggests that one aspect of the desired state of the world that motivates infants’ earliest
communication simply is alignment with other agents’ mental states (Tomasello, Carpenter, &
Liszkowski, 2007).
This example illustrates a signal feature of cooperative communication; namely, joint
attention to a referent (Tomasello, 2008). There is substantial inconsistency in definitions of joint
attention within and across psychological subdisciplines (Siposova & Carpenter, 2019). We follow
the lead of Tomasello and colleagues (e.g., Tomasello, 1995) by defining joint attention as triadic
situations in which two or more individuals possess reliable evidence that all participants are
attending to the same referent, and that all participants know they are attending to the same referent
(i.e., ‘attending together’). This formulation of joint attention – in terms of reliable evidence for
the mutually inferred alignment of attention (cf. mental states) – fits well with our proposal, which
mandates the gathering of reliable evidence for the alignment of mental states.
The importance of joint attention for enabling cooperative communication comes from the
fact that joint attention enables, and is enabled by, individuals’ capacity to reliably ‘ground’ their
communication in shared referents (Clark, 1996). Grounding creates something called common
ground (Clark & Brennan, 1991). Common ground is the set of mental states (knowledge, beliefs,
emotions, etc.) that is inferred to be reliably shared with others (Clark, 1996; Gadamer, 2003;
Tomasello, 2014). The capacity to regulate communication with others by leveraging joint
attention and common ground is present from the onset of cooperative communication (Tomasello
et al., 2007). For instance, young infants use their shared experience with a particular person to
comprehend and produce utterances and pointing gestures directed toward that individual (Ganea
& Saylor, 2007; Liebal, Behne, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2009; Liebal, Carpenter, & Tomasello,
2010; Saylor & Ganea, 2007; Tomasello & Haberl, 2003).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Moreover, part of regulating communication with respect to common ground is
understanding, for instance, that one must try to ‘fit’ their communication to the inferred needs of
another (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). As a simple example of this kind of ‘perspectivizing’
(Verhagen, 2007) or ‘recipient design’ (Schegloff, 2006) process, consider that how one chooses
to talk about an artefact varies as a function of the inferred amount of cultural common ground
shared with one’s interlocutor. In the presence of much cultural common ground, a communicator
might opt for brevity; and conversely, in the presence of less cultural common ground, one might
use more precise (explicit, descriptive) language. For instance, when conversing with someone
from Western cultural groups, one might employ the more cumbersome, longer descriptive
utterance “the terrifying creature from Turkish folklore that appears during sleep paralysis” instead
of the shorter proper name “Karabasan” (Jalal et al., in press). The upshot is that, in general, more
common ground means less communication is needed to align mental states to a sufficient degree,
and less common ground means more communication is required (Tomasello, 2008). In other
words, the amount of information necessary to align mental states to a degree adequate to enable
cooperative behavior within a given context is inversely proportional to the amount of common
ground.
This turns on an important point: the optimization of relevance in cooperative
communication (Sperber & Wilson, 1986). Relevance refers to the complexity-accuracy trade-off
involved in the production and interpretation of communication; e.g., the trade-off between
simplicity or compressibility, and meaningfulness or expressivity. A useful way to think about
how this trade-off is finessed is in terms of communicative constructions (Goldberg, 2003).
Communicative constructions are patterned pairings of form and meaning (e.g., word parts and
order, intonation) whose synchronic use and form are the result of diachronic patterns of use and
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
associated intergenerational transmission (e.g., processes of grammaticalization and reanalysis;
Bybee, 2010; Heine & Kuteva, 2002). Cooperative communicators use communicative
constructions to communicate (and thereby align their mental states).
Optimizing relevance, for a speaker, therefore means using the most minimal form that is
expected to enable a listener to recover (something sufficiently similar to) the intended meaning
(Kanwal, Smith, Culbertson, & Kirby, 2017); and for a listener, it means inferring the most
parsimonious meaning that sufficiently explains the speaker’s intentions (Kao, Wu, Bergen, &
Goodman, 2014; see Goodman & Frank, 2016). This means, as above, that individuals sharing
more common ground require less form to adequately align mental states, while those sharing less
common ground require relatively more form (Winters, Kirby, & Smith, 2018). Relatedly, simpler
propositions generally require less form to convey, and more complex propositions require more
form (Kemmer, 2003). Producing and interpreting relevant communicative constructions thus has
implications across the communicative signal, which spans from (e.g.) lexical selection and word
order choice to the sequencing of particular phonemes and intonation patterns (Aylett & Turk,
2004).
Importantly, how might an individual recognize another’s intention to generate an act of
communication intended ‘for’ oneself in the first place (e.g., Behne, Carpenter, & Tomasello,
2005)? From another perspective, how might one make mutually apparent one’s proximate
motivation to align mental states, that one is communicating ‘for’ another individual? To this end,
researchers have proposed that ostensive cues (Sperber & Wilson, 1986), like eye contact,
spatiotemporal contingency, and the communicative (e.g., vocal) signal itself, play an important
role in making mutually apparent an agent’s intentions to communicate information intended to
align mental states (reviewed in Csibra, 2010; indeed, Tomasello, 2014, synonymously calls
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
cooperative communication ‘ostensive-inferential’ communication). Ostensive cues work by
‘grabbing’ the attention of others to redirect it triadically (i.e., towards the intended referent) so as
to comment on it (Szufnarowska, Rohlfing, Fawcett, & Gredebäck, 2014). Thus, via their
modulatory effects on the allocation of (joint) attention, ostensive cues play a critical (if indirect)
role in increasing individuals’ common ground and enhancing the reliability of one’s inferences
about this common ground (e.g., Moll, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2007). This has important
downstream effects on subsequent behavior. For example, communicative eye contact causes
preschoolers to quickly infer another’s desire to collaboratively play a stag hunt game (Siposova,
Tomasello, & Carpenter, 2018; Wyman, Rakoczy, & Tomasello, 2013). Moreover, via their effects
on attention, ostensive cues play an important role in guiding inductive inference and top-down
categorization processes throughout ontogeny (Butler & Tomasello, 2016; Kovács, Téglás,
Gergely, & Csibra, 2017).
Taking stock
In sum, five key components characterizing cooperative communication were noted in this
section. Discussion of these components structures much of Section 4. First, great apes do not
characteristically employ communication geared towards aligning mental states with conspecifics.
Moreover, something like the motivations and skills underlying the communication of great apes
likely served as a precursor to the evolution of cooperative communication in humans. Second,
human communication is fueled by a motivation to align and coordinate mental states with
conspecifics. This is a kind of mutual expectation of cooperativeness that is manifest most
basically in processes of joint attention, which serves as a kind of ‘evolutionarily endowed’
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
common ground that gets the process of communication ‘off the ground’ in human ontogeny.
Third, individuals using cooperative communication optimize the relevance of their
communication, that is, the produced and inferred expressiveness of the communicative signal
with respect to the production and processing costs of that signal. This depends on the common
ground shared by interlocutors, such that, all else being equal, more common ground means less
communication and less common ground demands more communication. Fourth, ostensive cues
signal one’s intention to communicate to another individual (and help one to disambiguate
another’s intention to communicative to oneself). These are cues like eye contact, contingency,
and the speech signal itself.
Fifth and finally, it is useful to highlight that cooperative communication typically
manifests, particularly in early ontogeny, as a circular or bidirectional flow of information (note,
e.g., the double-arrowed base of the canonical ‘joint attentional triangle’; Carpenter & Liebal,
2011). Thus, although we introduced cooperative communication by focusing largely on individual
imperatives, it is a fundamentally collaborative process (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). The usage
of cooperative communication is a relevance-optimized exchange of perspectives that manifests
as a circular process of ‘least collaborative effort’ (Clark & Brennan, 1991). This characteristic
circularity endows individuals with a single shared narrative constituted by their individual
perspectives and roles in the collaborative. Figure 1 summarizes these points along with several
others introduced in section 4.
Implicit in the preceding discussion is the idea that it would be surprising – that is, highly
atypical – to find an adult human without a communicative system that they could employ to align
their mental states with those of others. In this sense, the usage of cooperative communication is a
predictable, or expected, aspect that characterizes part of the human phenotype. A question one
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
might ask is, How does this expectation over species-typical states (i.e., this aspect of the
phenotype) persist, robustly, across time and (action in) a fluctuating niche?
Active Inference
Active inference is a theory of belief-guided adaptive action (Friston, FitzGerald, Rigoli,
Schwartenbeck, & Pezzulo, 2017). It is a mathematical framework that models the processes by
which organisms and their niche come to ‘fit’ or become ‘attuned’ to each other (for an
introduction to the mathematical apparatus of active inference, see Bogacz, 2017; Buckley, Kim,
McGregor, & Seth, 2017). In other words, active inference describes the manner in which
organisms and their environments come to possess statistical properties that are predictable from
each other (Bruineberg, Rietveld, Parr, van Maanen, & Friston, 2018; Constant, Ramstead,
Veissière, Campbell, & Friston, 2018). On this view, organisms come to embody statistical models
of their ecological niche via perception and learning, and both cultural and natural selection (i.e.,
empirical and adaptive priors, respectively). Reciprocally, organisms modify their niche to fit their
prior beliefs via adaptive action and niche construction. As detailed in Figure 2, the models in this
formulation are ‘generative models’ that recapitulate the causal independencies between the
factors that generate their sensory input (i.e., how the niche causes their sensory data; e.g., Hinton,
2007; LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015). In active inference, organisms are, roughly speaking,
normative models of what ought to be the case, given ‘the kind of creature that I am’ (Friston,
2011).
The main theoretical suggestion of this paper is that human individuals appear,
characteristically (i.e., species-typically), to be endowed with an adaptive prior that one’s mental
states are aligned with those of conspecifics. Now, for human agents, the mental states of other
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
agents are unobservable or ‘hidden’ states that need to be inferred on the basis of perceptual cues
(e.g., gaze direction, posture, facial expression). In other words, mental state alignment is an
inference problem: to align with others, an agent must infer the latent or hidden causes (i.e., mental
states) that generate observable consequences (i.e., actions). Thus, for agents whose niche includes
the mental states of other agents, the set of actions that resolve uncertainty about the niche must
comprise actions that reliably disambiguate others’ mental states4. We suggest that this is precisely
the situation brought about by the presence of an adaptive prior for alignment. This adaptive prior
fosters specific, patterned forms of (communicative) action and inference that are aimed at
disambiguating the mental states of other agents. The characteristic result of this process is the
alignment of mental states between conspecifics. The alignment process enables and maintains
reliable hypotheses about shared narratives that contextualize our experience (Friston & Frith,
2015a).
Active inference, adaptive priors, and alignment
In active inference, actions are generated by hierarchically organized policies (beliefs about
action). The policy pursued by an organism at a particular time is the one that minimizes an
information-theoretic variational free energy term (Friston et al., 2015; for a review of variational
inference, see Blei, Kucukelbir, & McAuliffe, 2017). Roughly speaking, free energy quantifies the
discrepancy between what an agent expects or prefers to sense and what it actually senses. This
4 This is described anthropomorphically, as though individuals are explicitly engaged in an inference like ‘I want to
attune the statistics of our brains.’ Clearly, this is not the case. Rather, this language is used for expository purposes.
Indeed, this descriptive tendency is essentially the same as that used by, e.g., Tomasello (2019), where talk of
humans’ ultimate motivation to align and coordinate mental states often surfaces in place of proximate instantiations
thereof. We thank L. Li (personal communication, December, 2018) for noting this ambiguity.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
conception of free energy is closely related to prediction error (i.e., the mismatch between
predicted and observed sensations; Clark, 2013). A complementary view of free energy is that it
scores the (negative log) evidence for the internal model generating predictions, in the sense that
sensory data that conform to predictions provide evidence for the veracity of the agent’s generative
model. In short, minimizing free energy is the same as soliciting sensory evidence for one’s model
of the world (sometimes known as ‘self-evidencing’; Hohwy, 2016). On this view, we are our own
existence proofs.
The free energy expected under a policy tracks the probability of that particular policy
being pursued (i.e., of that specific policy being selected to guide action). Relatively less expected
free energy indicates a relatively more probable policy (Friston et al., 2015; Pezzulo, Rigoli, &
Friston, 2018; relatedly, Cisek, 2007). Expected free energy can be decomposed into two terms:
epistemic value (the information gain of an observation), and pragmatic value (the expected log
evidence of some outcome, given a generative model of how outcomes depend on action). The
relative influence of each term quantifies the degree to which a particular policy generates actions
that explore the niche (i.e., exploration), or actions that leverage reliable expectations about the
niche to secure preferred outcomes5 (i.e., exploitation) (Friston et al., 2015). This is depicted in
Figure 26.
Salient policies are those that have a high epistemic value or affordance (Parr & Friston,
5 These outcomes are a priori preferred because they are the least surprising ones; i.e., outcomes that ‘a creature like
me’ would expect to encounter.
6 A mathematically equivalent but complementary division of expected free energy is into ambiguity and risk.
Ambiguity is the expected uncertainty about outcomes given some state in the future, while risk is the divergence
between anticipated and preferred outcomes. Interestingly, risk is also the expected complexity cost found in
statistics. This means that minimising expected free energy – by selecting the right kind of policies – implicitly
minimises the complexity cost of inference. This is exactly the imperative established in the previous section;
namely to find ‘common ground’ that minimises communication cost. This particular perspective can be traced back
to the foundational principles of universal computation, where variational free energy is often discussed in terms of
minimum description or message lengths. See MacKay (1995), Schmidhuber (2010), and Wallace & Dowe (1999)
for more discussion.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
2017). These energize actions that enable an agent to learn the statistical regularities of its
environment (see caption, Fig. 2). This, in turn, enables pragmatic imperatives to foster actions
that capitalize on learned regularities (Friston et al., 2015). For example, repeated exposure to the
sensory phenomena characteristic of their culture’s communicative constructions leads infants to
become familiar with the statistical properties of those constructions (Romberg & Saffran, 2010).
In turn, increasingly precise expectations about hidden causes may lead infants to prefer gathering
information from speakers of their native language relative to speakers of a foreign language (e.g.,
Begus, Gliga, & Southgate, 2016; Marno et al., 2016). This is predicted by the hypothesis that
agents exploit their familiarity with the sensory phenomena characteristic of their culture’s
communicative constructions to guide attention towards sensory stimuli that is expected to be
useful for disambiguating the mental states of others (Figures 2 and 3).
In active inference, the folk-psychological term ‘attention’ refers to two distinct, but
closely related, phenomena; namely, epistemic value and precision weighting (Parr & Friston,
2017). Epistemic value, salience, or affordance is the component of policy selection just discussed;
it is that component of the value of policies that tracks how much a policy reduces uncertainty
about the state of the world (e.g., Friston, Adams, Perrinet, & Breakspear, 2012). It provides a
description of the folk-psychological phenomenon of activity orienting towards or ‘turning one’s
attention’ to a certain modality or part of the sensory field (e.g., in visual saccades that sample a
particular location in visual space). In short, salience or epistemic affordance is an attribute of how
we sample the world – in the sense that actively sampling sensory information will reduce
uncertainty, in relation to our current beliefs. In contrast, precision is an attribute of the sensory
data per se. Imprecise sensory data should have less effect on (Bayesian) belief updating, relative
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
to precise information. It is therefore important to afford the right precision to each sensory sample,
via precision weighting.
Precision-weighing is the related (but distinct) attentional process that determines the
relative influence of bottom-up error signals and top-down expectations in the brain; e.g., a high
precision on sensory signals corresponds to low confidence in top-down beliefs (Clark, 2013;
Powers, Kelley, & Corlett, 2016). That is, in the sense of precision-weighting, ‘attention’ refers to
the optimization of the precision (inverse variance) of prior beliefs about the causes of sensory
data, relative to the precision of those data; in other words, attentional selection is in the game of
selecting the right sort of sensory information for belief updating. This precision weighting in the
brain is thought to be mediated by the modulation of neuronal gain (Kanai, Komura, Shipp, &
Friston, 2015). Precise (attended, ascending) error signals then serve to modulate action and direct
what is learned (Adams et al., 2013; Feldman & Friston, 2010). The complement of this attentional
selection is the attenuation of precision; known in psychophysics as sensory attenuation; i.e.,
attending away from or ignoring certain sensations; particularly those we cause ourselves.
Crucially, selective attention and attenuation of precision can be part of the covert (mental)
actions that are entailed by a policy. In other words, when selecting the policy that minimizes
expected free energy we are also committing to both overt action on the (embodied) world –
through moving, blushing, speaking etc. – and a covert attentional set. We will now illustrate these
aspects (orienting to salient stimuli and attentional selection) of active inference with two
examples.
As a first example, in the case of human communication, orienting to salient sensory
streams should enhance the ability to learn the causes (i.e., mental states) generating sensory
evidence by making beliefs about mental states generating that stream more probable. With this in
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
mind, note that one common motivation for infants’ and young children’s communication is
quintessentially uncertainty resolving and ‘interrogative’ (Begus & Southgate, 2012; Harris, Bartz,
& Rowe, 2017). For instance, infants’ pointing can function as a request for information about the
name or function of objects (Begus & Southgate, 2012; Kovács, Tauzin, Téglás, Gergely, &
Csibra, 2014). It is thus interesting that, in line with the present account, orienting to
communicative bids enhances learning of (e.g.) communicative constructions and object functions
(Begus, Gliga, & Southgate, 2014; Lucca & Wilbourn, 2018a, 2018b; see Friston, & Frith, 2015a).
In short, infants evince sophisticated policies for resolving uncertainty and creating opportunities
for epistemic foraging. In turn, attending to and learning the causes of the communicative stream
then enables policies to exploit prior beliefs about how such sensations were caused; that is,
inferring whether or not we are aligned, based on the evidence generated through our interactions
(e.g., in using learned constructions to ask, explicitly, ‘Do you understand?’). This brings us to our
second example.
For agents who expect their predictions to be fulfilled, individuals who do not provide
evidence for this expectation – despite one’s attempts to actively attune mental states – should
come to be treated as imprecise sources of sensory information, relative to others that fulfil their
expected ‘role’ in the evidence gathering process; i.e., others that are afforded epistemic trust
(Fonagy and Allison, 2014). In other words, in a given communicative interaction, salient policies
are those that are expected to be useful with respect to the alignment of mental states; e.g., in
certain instances of conversational repair (Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks, 1977). Across
interactions with specific others, repeatedly experiencing surprising responses (i.e., insufficient
evidence for, or evidence against, alignment) means that selective attention towards those specific
others comes to be afforded low precision (i.e., ignored). Subsequently, action should lead the
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
appearance, on average across time, of avoidance such unreliable parts of the niche (Constant et
al., 2018) – much as we tend to avoid the dark when searching for something (Demirdjian et al.,
2005).
We suggest that this provides an explanation of the findings by Liszkowski et al. (2004),
discussed above, which reported that 12-month-olds were dissatisfied with an uncooperative adult
who failed to provide both look-backs between the infant and their intended referent and the same
emotional response as the infant in response to the infant’s communicative bids. On our view,
infants were attempting a kind of fast ‘error correction’ by generating actions expected to minimize
exposure to unexpected cues (i.e., allostatic control; see Pezzulo, Rigoli, & Friston, 2015). This
occurred via a rapid increase in the salience of policies that generate pointing behavior when
sampling sensory data that was inconsistent with infants’ prior beliefs about alignment. Moreover,
only the group of infants who attempted to communicate with an uncooperative adult pointed
significantly less across trials; through the lens of active inference, they had revised their
expectations about the sensory effects of action, leading them to select other policies.
This second example suggests that, within and across trials of the experiment, infants
appeared to climb an evidence gradient for their expectations. That is, repeated orienting to cues
indicative of the (dis)alignment of prior beliefs – despite allostatic control geared towards avoiding
such surprising encounters – caused infants to infer and learn that their interaction partner was
unhelpful with regards to gathering evidence for their (species-typical) prior beliefs. For the infant,
orienting to the sensory consequences of repeated failed attempts to elicit evidence from the adult
indicative of alignment (e.g., look-backs and symmetrical emotions) had an impact on the expected
free energy of policies. In particular, policies geared towards inferring the prior beliefs of the
uncooperative adult came to be characterized by a relatively high expected free energy.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Consequently, such policies became relatively unlikely to gain control over action; i.e., less
communication with that adult.
In sum, by suggesting that humans are characterized by an adaptive prior for alignment,
we effectively argue that policies expected to disambiguate others’ mental states are characterized
by a low expected free energy. This is by virtue of their high epistemic affordance (i.e., in a niche
partly constituted by others’ mental states). Consequently, these policies tend to dominate action
– people tend to gesticulate and talk with others. Repeatedly leveraging this belief to guide context-
sensitive patterns of action, in turn, enables agents to learn the structure and dynamics of their
niche. Because the human niche includes others’ mental states, beliefs about how to act to
effectively infer and align with others will have high adaptive value (Constant, Clark, Kirchhoff
& Friston, in press). This means that learning likely entails refining one’s set of ‘communicative
policies’ to approximate the set of policies expected (i.e., typically used) in one’s cultural milieu.
In short, leveraging communicative constructions means converging on the mutually inferred, or
deontic, value of policies geared towards disambiguating mental states among agents equipped
with an adaptive prior for alignment.
Deontic value: Shared expectations about the value of policies
Above we assumed that the prior beliefs of conspecifics had converged on the set of
constructions leveraged in their cultural niche. This assumption is important, as our argument
considers the acquisition and (cultural) evolution of communicative constructions (Sections 4.2
and 4.3). Within active inference, the concept of shared or deontic value – and associated deontic
cues – (Constant et al., 2018, 2019) may be useful for understanding the emergence of cooperative
communication in ontogeny and cultural evolution.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
The deontic value of a policy rests on a direct (‘automatized’) likelihood mapping between
learned cues and associated action policies. The mapping from deontic cue to policy is ‘direct’ in
the sense that observation of a deontic cue comes to ‘automatically’ elicit an associated (i.e.,
learned) policy7. Deontic cues are observations that trigger such automatic, or habitual, policy
selection (Constant et al., 2019). Encultured agents learn deontic observation-policy mappings in
development, through their engagement with the deontic cues that populate their local cultural
niche (e.g., Chukoskie, Snider, Mozer, Krauzlis, & Sejnowski, 2013). By ‘offloading’ cognition
into the environment in this way (see Clark, 2008; and Clark, 2006), the direct mapping enables
individuals to bypass costly updates to, and metabolic upkeep of, their beliefs about what to do
(given what is inferred of the niche). This allows agents to rely directly on deontic cues to select
the most appropriate policy (Constant et al., 2018). There is clearly a close relationship between
deontic cues, semiotics, and signs (Goodwin, 2000; Sewell, 1992; Silverstein, 2003) that
underwrite communication. Perhaps the most celebrated system of encultured deontic cues is
language itself.
For instance, consider an individual who has learned the English construction ‘let alone’
(Fillmore, Kay, & O’Connor, 1988); that is, a communicative construction marked by a
comparative ‘let alone’ phrase centered between clause X and clause (fragment) Y; e.g., ‘I could
barely run 1 mile let alone 4 miles’. Learning the ‘let alone’ construction, as one example of a
more general phenomenon (Section 4), entails learning the deontic value of cues (for policies that
parse spoken or written language). In short, if I hear you utter the phrase ‘X’ and possess prior,
reliably shared knowledge of the construction ‘X let alone Y’, then I can reliably expect you to
7 Technically, expected free energy is combined with deontic value to score the likelihood of a particular policy. In
the absence of deontic value, the expected free energy will select the most apt epistemic and goal directed policy,
given beliefs about the current state of the world. Conversely, if certain cues render the deontic value of a policy
sufficiently high, it will dominate policy selection – and emerge as a habit.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
follow up with ‘let alone Y.’ This example assumes a probabilistic (generative) model of how
communicative sensations are caused (e.g., a scheme to reliably parse syntax; Levy, 2008;
reviewed in Kuperberg & Jaeger, 2016). In particular, this turns on the acquisition of the deontic
value of linguistic policies entailed by the hypothesis that one is witnessing a ‘let alone’
construction.
But how do such reliable mappings come to exist in the first place? That is, how do
communicative constructions ‘build up’ over (neurodevelopmental or evolutionary) time?
Consider a simple example: continually walking along the same path across a park each day wears
down the grass along that path (Constant et al., 2018). As the grass wears down and a clear path
forms, one learns to expect the associated sensory cues when revisiting the path. Because of this,
the path becomes increasingly salient for both oneself and for others ‘like me’, who can (like me)
leverage such ‘meaningful’ traces left by my actions at later time points. Consequently, the
cognitive processing associated with answering the question ‘Where ought I to walk next’ is
afforded directly by physical features of the niche. This saves on the costs associated with planning
as active inference (Attias, 2003; Baker and Tenenbaum, 2014; Botvinick and Toussaint, 2012;
Mirza et al., 2016) – the inference is literally ‘offloaded’ into the environment (see equations in
Figs. 2 and 3). The niche provides a clue as to what to do, reliably, as a deontic cue.
Crucially, when this process of ‘carving out’ deontic cues in the niche is performed by an
increasing number of agents, the deontic value of policies and associated cues becomes
increasingly robust to perturbations. In other words, the expectations of the social niche – here, the
set of form-meaning pairings constituting a communicative system – become increasingly precise
with increases in the number of interactions between agents constituting that system (Constant et
al., 2019). Increasingly precise, niche-based expectations mean that agents become more likely to
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
sensitize their behavior to that cue; e.g., the dynamics of a cue become sufficiently precise so as
to enable learning of that cue and its associated action policy in ontogeny (see Section 4.3). In
multi-agent systems equipped with an adaptive prior to align mental states, learning of deontic
value (i.e., inferring the most common policies undertaken by other denizens of the niche) is
learning the ‘shared’ value of a policy – the value of a policy for people ‘like me’ in our community
(Figure 3).
What might it mean to offload cognition into the environment in the fashion above, for
agents equipped with an adaptive prior to attune mental states? Individuals effectively outsource
solutions to the problem of ‘How ought I to talk’ to the niche itself. The traces left by repeatedly
aligning mental states via communication may enable the niche to subsequently afford increasingly
precise, shared expectations about how other agents ‘like me’ (should) act so as to align mental
states most effectively (e.g., during evolutionarily relevant stag hunt scenarios; Grau-Moya, Hez,
Pezzulo, & Braun, 2013). In principle, this takes pressure off inferring “what sort of person am I
in this context” (Moutoussis et al., 2014). Technically, it finesses the computational cost of belief
updating from (deontically installed) priors to posterior beliefs about behaviors that are apt for the
current setting. Consequently, the cue (or sequence of cues) may come to be preferred by both
individuals during subsequent interactions in similar contexts (Lewis, 1969; Schelling, 1960; e.g.,
Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). Formally speaking, at later instances of interaction, the expected
free energy of historically selected policies – leveraged to align mental states – falls; such policies
then tend to be selected to generate predictable action sequences geared towards the alignment of
mental states (Friston & Frith, 2015b).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Human Communication as Active Inference
This section provides a discussion of our proposal. The species-typical motivation to align
mental states with conspecifics is cast as an adaptive prior preference for alignment. This, we
suggest, provides the basis for a normative framework for predicting, explaining, and modelling
the behavioral, psychological, and neural underpinnings of cooperative communication. Our
discussion in this section telescopes from considerations at the microscale (i.e., interaction), to the
mesoscale (i.e., ontogeny), and, finally, to the macroscale (i.e., cultural evolution).
Dynamics at the timescale of interaction: The individual in context
A central part of the content of the prior for alignment is that the actions of agents (e.g.,
oneself) update the mental states (prior beliefs) of other agents. Because mental states cause action
(and, hence, observations), gathering reliable evidence for this prior means that agents orient to
the individual(s) towards whom their action is directed – the sensory consequences of one’s action
are realized by the actions of others. That is, if one expects to infer others’ mental states, the only
evidence available is found in the observed consequences of others’ actions (Figure 4). Indeed,
policies that direct action towards others – so as to disambiguate their mental states (e.g.,
attentional orienting and, later, cooperative pointing) – possess an evolutionarily unique (Seyfarth
& Cheney, 2003), maturationally constrained salience from early in life (Matthews, Behne, Lieven,
& Tomasello, 2012; Reddy, 2003). Gathering evidence for these expectations manifests in coupled
action-perception cycles (Friston, & Frith, 2015a); i.e., intentionally co-constructed loops of
action-perception that induce a reliable statistical coupling between two coupled agents (reviewed
in, e.g., Feldman, 2015; Hasson & Frith, 2016; Hasson, Ghazanfar, Galantucci, Garrod, & Keysers,
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
2012). For expository purposes, we may say that, within the coupled action-perception cycle of
human agents, evidence for the self amounts to evidence for the other; and evidence for the other
is evidence for the self.
Above, we discussed how mutual expectations of cooperativeness play a crucial role in
getting cooperative communication off the ground in ontogeny. This just means that the
(epigenetically and neurodevelopmentally) constrained, precise beliefs about the similarity of
others and oneself enable nascent individuals to engage in cooperative communication. In
particular, such couplings are only possible because both agents possess reliable expectations that
the other agent is sufficiently ‘like me’ (cf. Meltzoff, 2007): we share the same prior beliefs to
attune hidden dynamics. This provides an initial ‘naive’ confidence in beliefs about how one’s
action will influence another’s prior beliefs (that, in turn, influence sensory outcomes via their
actions). Borrowing from the language of social constructivist views of development (e.g., Rhodes
& Wellman, 2017), our prior is a kind of naive certainty in one’s intuitive theory about agential
efficacy, with respect to the mental states of others (see also Kelso, 2016). This is to say that prior
beliefs about the niche, e.g., others’ mental states, bottom out just in their expected free energy.
Belief-guided action (e.g., collaboration) may thus be constrained by salient policies entailed by a
prior belief that, psychologically speaking, some hypothesis is in common ground. Put simply, to
the extent that this hypothesis is sufficiently reliable, it will guide action and inference (see Figure
4 and, e.g., Gallagher & Allen, 2018; Yoshida, Dolan, & Friston, 2008).
Pursuing this line of reasoning further provides a single, formally specified framework to
subsume distinct proximate motivations for communication. That is, proximate motivations for
communication (e.g., declarative, expressive, informative, interrogative motives; Begus &
Southgate, 2012; Tomasello, 2019) surface as particular psychological manifestations of the same,
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
species-typical tendency to align prior beliefs. Consider two proximate motivations for
communication noted above; namely, a ‘declarative’ one motivated by the desired alignment of
attentional states; and an ‘interrogative’ one motivated by a desire to learn about the niche. In the
former case, individuals exploit their reliably shared beliefs to render the niche sufficiently similar
to themselves (e.g., ‘By ostensively pointing for that other agent, I expect to effectively align our
mental states with respect to my intended referent’); and in the latter, individuals explore the
precise, reliable parts of the niche (here, other agents) to improve their internal model of the niche
(e.g., ‘What is this thing called?’; reviewed in Harris, 2011; Harris et al., 2017). The underlying
commonality in both cases is that individuals are effectively generating action-perception cycles
that couple them to others, with the result being the alignment of mental states with respect to the
niche.
Moving now to relevance optimisation, we remind the reader that this process involves
finessing the trade-off between the accuracy (e.g., meaningfulness, expressivity) and complexity
(e.g., minimum description length, hierarchical depth of the policy) of their communicative
constructions. Under active inference (see Pezzulo, Donnarumma, & Dindo, 2013), if the prior
beliefs of two individuals are inferred to be highly divergent on the basis of the evidence each
provides to the other, and if both expect to minimize this divergence to a sufficient degree, then
costlier (e.g., hierarchically deeper or more complex) policies should become relatively more
salient as agents become increasingly dissimilar, as these policies will be necessary to resolve
uncertainty or disambiguate the mental state of inscrutable others. This is in contrast to two
individuals who ‘speak the same language’. Here, less information needs to flow within the
coupled action-perception cycle to attune mental states to a similar degree. In support of this view,
one study (Kanwal et al., 2017) found that adults optimize the relevance of their communicative
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
constructions during collaborative tasks as a function of their common ground, by using shorter
words for common objects and longer words for uncommon objects (see also Winters et al., 2018).
Related work suggests that children’s adjective use (Bannard, Rosner, & Matthews, 2017), turn-
taking dynamics (Butko & Movellan, 2010), and question asking (Nelson, Divjak,
Gudmundsdottir, Martignon, & Meder, 2014) may be usefully cast as if they were optimizing the
information content of produced communicative constructions with respect to processing and
energy concerns (cf. Pea, 1979).
For a receiver, attention to the communicative stream enables updates to one’s beliefs by
providing ‘contextual effects’ (Sperber & Wilson, 1987); that is, orienting to a speaker influences
the precision of hypotheses (about, e.g., the interpretation of an utterance) through appropriate
selection of ascending sensory information (indexed neurophysiologically by alpha suppression;
Höhl, Michel, Reid, Parise, & Striano, 2014; and increased theta; Begus et al., 2016; Köster,
Langeloh, Höhl, 2019). Specifically, individuals appear to explain away incoming sensory data by
zeroing in on informative (useful) but parsimonious (i.e., efficient) explanations of hidden causes
(Goodman & Frank, 2016; see also Gershman, Horvitz, & Tenenbaum, 2015). For instance, Frank
& Goodman (2014) report that adult and child listeners disambiguate ambiguous word meanings
by optimizing their inferences of the relevance of a speaker’s intended meaning8. In particular,
these inferences can be captured as if individuals were maximizing model evidence for the prior
belief that speakers are informative (see also Kao et al., 2014). This is captured by our extended
formulation of cooperative communication, where inferences about mental states can be cast in
8 Interestingly, in machine learning, automatic relevance determination is a term used to denote model selection
based upon variational free energy; namely, the removal of redundant model parameters to maximise efficiency or
Bayesian model evidence. In turn, this is closely related to principles of minimum redundancy and maximum
efficiency in perception (Barlow, 1974; Linsker, 1990; Wipf & Rao, 2007).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
terms of maximizing Bayesian model evidence (i.e., minimizing variational free energy) for the
causes of one’s sensation (e.g., another’s mental states; Friston & Frith, 2015a).
Given an adaptive prior for alignment, one should tend to favor policies expected to reliably
generate evidence of engagement in a coupled action-perception cycle. That is, such ostensive
policies – policies expected to generate ostensive cues – are adaptive because they tend to generate
sensory evidence for the hypothesis that one is engaged in a coupled action-perception cycle.
Ostensive policies indicate to one’s communicative partner that attending to one’s action (i.e., to
the individual generating ostensive cues) will likely be informative for them. Consequently, for a
recipient, evidence provided by such cues increases the salience of certain policies; e.g., attentional
orienting geared towards disambiguating the speaker’s prior beliefs (Szufnarowska et al., 2014).
As attention optimizes the precision of sensory cues, ostension in the coupled action-perception
cycle plays a crucial (if indirect) role in reliably entraining and shaping prior beliefs (Axelsson,
Churchley, & Horst, 2012; Butler & Tomasello, 2016; Kovács et al., 2017). Since prior beliefs
generate action, ostensive cues are thus critical for guiding other individuals’ actions and hence
one’s (attended) sensory states (e.g., Siposova et al., 2018).
By the same logic, in response to ostensive cues a recipient should (ostensively) signal
their own inferred entrance into a communicative coupling (e.g., uptake signals; Austin, 1962); as
well as, for example, their subjective degree of (and certainty in) the attunement of mental states
(e.g., backchannel signals; Clark & Brennan, 1991). Indeed, other individuals – inferred to possess
the same adaptive prior for alignment – preferentially leverage cooperative communication in turn;
that is, respond to one’s communicative bids (Kishimoto, Shizawa, Yasuda, Hinobayashi, &
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Minami, 2007; Wu & Gros-Louis, 2015). This makes sense in light of the adaptive prior specified
here: responding to another’s communicative bids is something in the interest of both agents9.
In summary, this subsection provided an active inference account of the microscale features
of cooperative communication, from an individual’s perspective, noted in Section 2. We have thus
outlined some important means by which individuals intentionally align their prior beliefs with
respect to the dynamics of the niche (Constant et al., 2018), including others’ mental states (Friston
& Frith, 2015a). Indeed, a foundational facet of our account is that the alignment of the mental
states of conspecifics manifests in the emergence of a novel scale of social and cultural dynamics
constituted by synchronized component individuals (Ramstead et al., 2018). We turn to this now.
Dynamics at the timescale of interaction: The dyad
The precision of one’s prior beliefs relative to another agent’s, with whom one is coupled,
has important implications for the degree and direction of attunement within and across couplings.
In particular, the relative precision of the prior beliefs of each agent constrains the characteristic
pattern of information flow between them – both at the level of turn taking in dialogical exchanges,
and at the level of learning useful generative models of others10 (and implicitly, of the self) (Friston
& Frith, 2015a; 2015b; Gencaga, Knuth, & Rossow, 2015; e.g., Schippers, Roebroeck, Renken,
Nanetti, & Keysers, 2010). In terms of learning, this means that individuals endowed with
9 It is useful to note that ostensive policies are salient insofar as they are (but one) intentional means for rapidly
increasing the precision of (certain kinds) of hypotheses for another agent; e.g., that it is likely worthwhile to attend
to the individual generating the ostensive cues. The account on offer therefore accommodates evidence suggesting
that non-ostensive (unintentional) but nonetheless attention-grabbing actions, like shivering, may have similar
effects on others’ attentional orienting as ostensive cues (de Bordes, Cox, Hasselman, & Cillessen, 2013;
Szufnarowska et al., 2014).
10 In numerical analyses of coupled communication, turn taking is usually implemented by a reciprocal
augmentation and attenuation of sensory precision – so that one member of the dyad is listening while the other is
speaking. Please see Friston & Frith (2015a) more details. A more enduring asymmetry relates to how one can learn
from others, as illustrated using simulations of birdsong in Friston & Frith (2015b).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
relatively imprecise prior beliefs tend more, on average across time, to modify their own structure
to fit that of their communicative partner(s), relative to individuals with relatively precise priors.
This is a special case of generalized synchronization that is underwritten by the enslaving principle
from cybernetics (Tschacher & Haken, 2007). To attune prior beliefs in such ‘asymmetric’
couplings, individuals with imprecise expectations in effect increase the precision of their sensory
states (i.e., ‘up the gain’ afforded to sensory input; Auksztulewicz et al., 2017; Moran et al., 2013).
This allows them to better change their own prior beliefs as a function of the evidence generated
by their own (and others’) action. This captures, for instance, the characteristic flow of information
between agents following exposure to cues of prestige, with prestigious individuals being ‘trend-
setters’ and others following suit (Henrich & Gil-White, 2001; Veissiére et al., 2019).
Additionally, such an asymmetry in information flow may capture the dynamics of the
coupled action-perception cycles characteristic of interactions between human infants and
children, and adults. Experimental and computational evidence suggests that older individuals
possess relatively precise prior expectations, relative to those of younger, less experienced
individuals (Karmali, Whitman, & Lewis, 2018; Wolpe et al., 2016). Thus, younger individuals
may ascribe greater precision to sensory information (Moran, Symmonds, Dolan, & Friston, 2014).
The hypothesis here is, then, that repeated couplings between infants and children with adults (and
more experienced peers) may cause the prior beliefs of inexperienced individuals to converge more
towards the hidden causes generating sensory consequences (i.e., the mental states of more
experienced others), rather than the other way around (Friston & Frith, 2015b; e.g., Fotopoulou &
Tsakiris, 2017). That is, coupled action-perception cycles in such dyads tend to be characterized
by an asymmetric entrainment of prior beliefs (for a closely related view, see Brownell, 2011).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
What does this mean for the dynamics of (neural) belief updating during interaction?
Technically, attunement to the niche instantiates the generalized synchronization of the statistics
of prior beliefs and the niche (e.g., others’ mental states); such that the structure and dynamics of
individual brains come to recapitulate the structure and dynamics of the niche in which they are
embedded11 (Friston, 2012). This is depicted in Figure 5. Synchronization is a phenomenon that
occurs in coupled chaotic dynamical systems (Pecora, Carroll, Johnson, Mar, & Heagy, 1997).
Technically, it means that there is a (diffeomorphic) function relating the dynamics of the state of
one system to those of the system with which it is coupled (Pecora, Carroll, & Heagy, 1995). For
instance, modelling results suggest that endowing two coupled hierarchical dynamical systems
with an expectation to infer the hidden causes generating another’s actions enables a bidirectional
flow of information that synchronizes the statistics of their prior beliefs (Constant et al., 2018;
Friston & Frith, 2015a). Alignment within and across coupled action-perception cycles means that
the similarity (technically, the mutual information) of individuals’ expectations increases (Friston
& Frith, 2015b; Hasson & Frith, 2016). In this scheme, attention functions as a kind of coupling
parameter, and its allocation is constrained by adaptive priors. Attention effectively increases the
amount of information transferred from the system with precise priors to the system with imprecise
priors (i.e., the system increasing the gain of its sensory states).
Indeed, studies in ‘two-person’ or hyperscanning neuroscience (Schilbach et al., 2013)
have found evidence of the synchronizing effects of the usage of cooperative communication
during, e.g., unidirectional person-to-person monologues (Liu et al., 2017; Pérez et al., 2017;
11 Technically, hidden states are characterized by their sufficient statistics. This denotes the minimum quantities
needed to fully describe a probability distribution (Cover & Thomas, 1991). For the Gaussian distributions used in
active inference, these are the mean and variance (see Buckley, Kim, McGregor, & Seth, 2017). Generalised
synchronisation implies that the mutual information of (the dynamics of) the states occupied by two (e.g.) chaotic
dynamical systems is high (Pecora et al., 1995).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Stephens, Silbert, & Hasson, 2010), person-to-group monologues (Schmälzle, Häcker, Honey, &
Hasson, 2015), bidirectional person-to-person dialogues (Jiang et al., 2012), and even between
classmates and their teacher during daily school activities (Dikker et al., 2017). Crucially, the
degree of interbrain synchrony of neural dynamics appears to strongly predict psychological
phenomena; for instance, the subjective meaningfulness of communication (Stolk et al., 2014), the
accuracy of recall of the content of communication (Zadbood, Chen, Leong, Norman, & Hasson,
2017), and the perceived ‘power’ of political speech (Schmälzle et al., 2015; reviewed in Feldman,
2015; Hasson & Frith, 2016; Hasson et al., 2012; Schoot, Hagoort, & Segaert, 2016; Stolk,
Verhagen, & Toni, 2016). Indeed, the quality and amount of action-perception couplings over the
course of early development better predicts later language ability (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015) and
language-related brain function (Romeo et al., 2018) than more traditional measures, such as the
number of words heard (Lindsay, Gambi, & Rabagliati, 2019). Similarly, synchronous interbrain
(limbic) dynamics in early infancy (i.e., prior to the onset of cooperative pointing) appears to be
concomitant with several kinds of positive social experience, such as closeness and social
bonding12 (Atzil, Hendler, & Feldman, 2014; Atzil et al., 2017; reviewed in Feldman, 2015; 2017).
Dynamics at the timescale of ontogeny
The dynamics sketched in Section 4.1.2 suggests a kind of Vygotskian scaffolding
(Vygotsky, 1978) or ‘co-construction’ (Tomasello, 2019) of the dynamics of internal states;
whereby – via recurrent engagement in loops of coupled action-perception with relatively
12 To be clear, our claim is not that only the usage of communicative constructions can give rise to interbrain
synchrony (see, e.g., evidence of nonverbal interbrain synchrony and associations with feelings of interpersonal
closeness, Kinreich, Djalovski, Kraus, Louzoun, & Feldman, 2017). Communicative constructions are merely a
(highly useful) means to gather reliable evidence for the adaptive prior specified in the main text.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
‘entrenched’ aspects of the niche – individuals learn (internalize) the salience of culturally
anticipated policies used to infer hidden states. That is, by acting in a shared environment that
contains older, relatively inflexible individuals that perform stereotyped behavior (characteristic
of ‘how we do things here’), younger individuals are able to learn the deontic value of policies
(Ramstead et al., 2016; Veissière et al., 2019). For our purposes, this means that individuals’ prior
beliefs become more similar across couplings through (bidirectional) processes of (asymmetric)
enculturation13 (Renzi, Romberg, Bolger, & Newman, 2017). That is, recurrent episodes of acutely
increased alignment – of the kind typical of coupled action-perception cycles – are necessary for
the creation and maintenance of species-typical states. In short, to gather evidence for an adaptive
prior that mental states are aligned, one must act to bring about sensory states that are indicative
of this belief (Byrge, Sporns, & Smith, 2014; Chiel & Beer, 1997).
Within and across interactions, such a dynamics increases the adaptive value of, e.g.,
collaborative foraging strategies by increasing inferred reliability in the hidden states generating
observations (others’ intentions; Han, Santos, Lenaerts, & Pereira, 2015; Nakamura & Ohtsuki,
2016). This is because gathering evidence for the prior beliefs of other agents entails predicting
how their beliefs relate to the niche; i.e., how others’ beliefs relate to one’s own mental states as
well as non-social affordances. Consequently, gathering reliable evidence for others’ mental states
entails redirecting attention triadically (jointly). In this way, individuals become more reliable
models of their interlocutor(s), and hence may leverage their own expectations about others’
13 For expository purposes we leave undiscussed the ontogenesis of critically important and later-appearing
interactions with peers (e.g., Ashley & Tomasello, 1998; Brownell & Carriger, 1990; Brownell, Ramani, & Zerwas,
2006; see Brownell & The Early Social Development Research Lab, 2016). Future explorations leveraging this
approach should look to integrate data relating to peer-peer interactions in ontogenesis (reviewed in Brownell,
2011). Indeed, such phenomena are of great interest to the present account given the (possibly) more complex
dynamics exhibited by the attunement of two systems embodying relatively imprecise expectations about how best
to minimise uncertainty (e.g., Eckerman, Davis, & Didow, 1989).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
actions to guide expectations over sensory outcomes, like couplings with environmental
affordances14 (e.g., Bach, Nicholson, & Hudson, 2014; Gallotti & Frith, 2013; Pezzulo, 2011).
A useful way to increase the degree of alignment of prior beliefs among individuals is to
send more information to one’s communicative partner. Holding the inferred common ground
constant, one of the main ways to convey more information is to allow for hierarchically deeper
policies (e.g., sequences of sequences) to generate action; that is, roughly, to provide more form
(i.e., use longer communicative constructions). In effect, more information about mental states is
thereby made observable. This perspective sheds interesting light on the species-typical trajectory
from triadic attention (Striano & Stahl, 2005) to more reliably enacted forms of joint attention
underwritten by reciprocal information flow – and the usage of pointing and gesture (Carpenter &
Liebal, 2011; Tomasello et al., 2007) – to more complex constructions leveraged to transact with
the hidden mental states of others (Aureli & Presaghi, 2010; see Colonnesi, Stams, Koster, &
Noom, 2010). The human agent appears to build up, nuance, and consolidate its (mutually
expected) repertoire of action policies that, based on experience, have proven useful for adequately
attuning with the mental states of conspecifics. That is, through this kind of continuous growth and
hierarchical differentiation in communicative action policies (Goldin-Meadow, 2007; Tomasello,
2008), human individuals appear as though they were learning to tune themselves to the niche, and
the niche to themselves.
Speaking generally, by repeatedly engaging in coupled action-perception cycles,
individuals distil and abstract deeper observation-policy mappings (i.e., constructions) from the
14 From this perspective, it may be interesting for modelling work to investigate the notion of joint attention as an
emergent property of coupling two hierarchical generative models attempting to infer the hidden states of each other
(e.g., Friston & Frith, 2015a) while embedded in a broader ecological niche (e.g., Williams & Yaeger, 2017). In
such a context, does joint attention effectively function to minimise a sensory Lagrangian over (jointly anticipated)
sensory states (Sengupta et al., 2016)? What role does cooperative communication play in maintaining such a gauge
invariance over the action of shared sensory states?
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
bottom up; that is, on an item-by-item basis (reviewed in Tomasello, 2000). In certain cases,
individuals may then leverage learned hypotheses (about how best to disambiguate mental states)
to reliably constrain the hypothesis space for learning and inference about constructions15
(McClelland et al., 2010; see also Tenenbaum, Kemp, Griffiths, & Goodman, 2011). That is,
induction at higher layers of the model can serve to bootstrap learning at lower layers. Such
‘domain-general’ learning processes are illustrated by the model of Perfors, Tenenbaum, & Regier
(2011). These authors provide a proof of principle account showing that several hours of child-
directed input is sufficient for the posterior expectations of a hierarchical approximate Bayesian
(i.e., active inference) learner – leveraging domain-general learning mechanisms – to converge
towards a single, high level hypothesis about the causes of sensory input (here, a set of context-
free grammars). That is, this set of context-free grammars had the greatest probability at the end
of training. Consequently, this empirical prior functioned as abstract knowledge – it constrained
expectations about likely hypotheses (in particular, auxiliary fronting) at lower layers16 (see also
Kemp, Perfors, & Tenenbaum, 2007).
Indeed, modelling schemes employing active inference provide evidence of their utility for
modelling attunement to a communicative system (e.g., Friston, Rosch, Parr, Price, & Bowman,
2017; Kiebel, Daunizeau, & Friston, 2008; Kiebel, von Kriegstein, Daunizeau, & Friston, 2009).
15 Relatedly, because higher, contextualising layers of a hierarchical model sample a larger space of inputs in
estimating a smaller number of (more abstract) hypotheses (Tenenbaum et al., 2011), agents may, in certain
instances, learn contextualising ‘overhypotheses’ faster than learning at lower layers of the model (Gershman,
2017).
16 We urge the reader to take the model of Perfors, Tenenbaum, & Regier (2011) with some caution. This is because
part of the specification of their model was a set of (sets of) grammars; that is, their model came ‘pre-equipped’ with
knowledge of various (formal, arbitrary) grammatical ‘principles’. Thus, their model had simply to converge on the
most probable set of grammars (hypothesis) given in its ‘innate’ repertoire. However, there is i) no clear evidence
for such innately specified (i.e., formal and arbitrary) linguistic principles in humans (Dąbrowska, 2015); ii) no clear
formulation of what may be included in such an innate repertoire (Tomasello, 2004); and iii) numerous logical
problems with the evolution of such innate structure (Christiansen & Chater, 2008; cf. e.g., Berwick, Friederici,
Chomsky, & Bolhuis, 2013).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
For instance, Yildiz, von Kriegstein, & Kiebel (2013) used the active inference formalism to model
word learning under optimal and noisy conditions and under variations in speaker accent. By
attending to incoming input (i.e., increasing the precision of sensory signals), their model tuned its
top-down beliefs to the structure of training data, which comprised sequences (of sequences) of
spoken phonemes. The authors report that this model outperformed other computational learning
schemes across a range of conditions and could be used to explain the judgements of adult second
language learners. Future modelling work should investigate how an adaptive prior for alignment
covers more ecologically valid instances of attunement to communicative constructions, such as
the effects that ‘starting small’ and a prolonged period of developmental immaturity have on
attuning to a communicative system (Bjorklund, 1997; Elman, 1993).
As noted, alignment with communicative partners means learning a set of ‘automatic,’
experientially robust (deontic) observation-policy mappings; e.g., the expectation (for English
speakers) that a determiner typically precedes a noun (Meylan, Frank, Roy, & Levy, 2017). Indeed,
this view fits nicely with usage-based approaches to language acquisition (Lieven, 2016;
Tomasello, 2003). Proponents of this view suggest that “constructions of all types are automatized
motor routines and subroutines” that “come out of language use in context and… cognitive skills
and strategies used in non-linguistic tasks” (Bybee, 2003, both p. 158).
Indeed, much of the structure and dynamics of the neural regions that underwrite the
learning and usage of cooperative communication have been exapted (in particular,
‘cooperativized’) from their earlier evolutionary functions (Anderson, 2010; Bjorklund & Ellis,
2014). This has been emphasized, for instance, by embodied neurosemantics models of the neural
underpinnings of the acquisition and comprehension of meaning in form-meaning pairings
(reviewed in Pulvermüller, 2013; 2015). In such approaches, the meanings of both concrete and
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
abstract constructions (e.g., ‘kick’ and ‘love,’ respectively) are grounded in low level sensorimotor
dynamics and action-perception circuits contextualized by top-down input (Moseley et al., 2012;
also, Harnad, 1990).
To elaborate, human brains effectively combine two kinds – or two hierarchical levels – of
general-purpose learning architecture to capitalize on the epistemic opportunities afforded by the
action-perception cycle: (i) self-supervised (approximate Bayesian) learning, via the dynamic,
hierarchical interplay between descending, neuronally encoded predictions and ascending
prediction errors over time (Badcock et al., 2019b); and (ii) supervised (social) learning in a
cultural niche via repeated, immersive practice in a set of culturally patterned routines (Ramstead
et al., 2016; Roepstorff, Niewöhner, & Beck, 2010). In effect, attuning to a system of
communication constructions requires learning how to process and use form-meaning pairings in
real-time communication. Thus, we are in agreement with Christiansen & Chater (2016a), who
note that “learning [a cooperative communication system] involves creating a predictive model of
the language, using online error-driven learning” (p. 121).
Deploying these learning processes in species typical communicative couplings means
that, on average over time, individuals’ communicative action policies become sufficiently similar;
that is, not identical, but usable (Kidd, Donnelly, & Christiansen, 2018; Tomasello, 2003). This is
depicted in Figure 6. For instance, Bannard, Lieven, and Tomasello (2009) found that the
perplexity (an information theoretic measure that quantifies the fit of a distribution to a set of
observations) of the (probabilistic) context-free grammar used to capture one child’s (Brian’s)
utterances at age 2;0 was able to account for approximately 15% of the utterances of another child
(Annie, also 2;0). Similarly, the grammar imputed to Annie at 2;0 was able to explain
approximately 36% of the utterances for Brian (2;0). Interestingly, at 3;0 model fit in either
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
direction was increased. Thus, the grammar imputed to Brian at 3;0 accounted for roughly 59% of
Annie’s utterances (3;0), while the grammar imputed to Annie at 3;0 accounted for about 63% of
Brian’s utterances (3;0). Though the authors did not compute the significance of this change, this
trend is precisely what one would expect under our model; namely, a trend towards statistically
similar prior beliefs over hidden causes as individuals converge towards their cultural attractor
(Figure 6).
In sum, by repeatedly ‘filtering’ one’s action through others’ mental states, one obtains a
useful set of policies for flexibly and economically disambiguating prior beliefs. These correspond
to policies with a high deontic value (Constant et al., 2019). In this way, one’s set of constructions
appears to converge on the set of constructions that constitute the communicative system(s) that
predominantly generate one’s sensory samples (i.e., those used by one’s speaker community). This
is to say that the prior beliefs of individuals converge towards an exploitable degree of similarity.
One thus instantiates a sufficiently reliable model of the processes that generate sensory
observations. This ontogenetic tendency repeats itself, cyclically, across generations. This has
critical implications for the historical development of least effort communicative systems, to which
we now turn.
Dynamics at the timescale of cultural evolution
According to the model of cooperative communication proposed here, communicative
systems (i.e., the dynamics of sets of form-meaning pairings) should appear, on average across
time, to minimize their variational free energy (Ramstead et al., 2018). But what, exactly, does this
mean; and how might this claim be investigated empirically? As noted above, a pointing gesture
does not, in general, allow an agent to infer hidden causes as efficiently or reliably as the usage of
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
a more complex construction. Therefore, in attempting to minimize their free energy,
communicative systems should evolve towards a balance between usability and learnability
(simplicity) on the one hand, and on the other, increasingly arbitrary, hierarchically deeper
(complex) action sequences. This means that communicative systems should appear to optimize
an accuracy-complexity, or expressivity-compressibility, trade-off (Tamariz & Kirby, 2016).
Consider, for instance, the “drift to the arbitrary” proposed by Tomasello (2008, p. 219). Here, the
suggestion is that ‘grainy’ bodily gestures like pointing give way to increasingly expressive, ‘finer
grained’ gestures like pantomime. In turn, relatively expressive gestures give way to even more
expressive, ‘finely grained’ vocal gestures like abstract and arbitrary communicative constructions
(for similar views, see Fay, Arbib, & Garrod, 2013; Perniss & Vigliocco, 2014; Wilcox, 2004).
Interestingly, this roughly recapitulates the general ontogenetic trajectory of cooperative
communication described above. It is as though – at multiple, nested scales of analysis – the human
agent were becoming increasingly adept at flexibly deploying an increasingly sophisticated set of
actions to resolve its sensory ambiguity.
These ideas are supported by the finding that the dynamics of relevance optimisation across
recurrent interactions, and generations of speakers, manifests in constructions that increase in
expressivity with respect to production and processing costs (Tamariz & Kirby, 2016; e.g., Kirby,
Tamariz, Cornish, & Smith, 2015; Fay et al., 2010). This means that human communicative
systems, after a sufficiently long period of evolution, tend to cluster in a kind of ‘least effort’
subregion of a design space (i.e., parameter space) of communicative systems17 (i Cancho & Solé,
2003; Seoane & Solé, 2018; see Dediu et al., 2013; Evans & Levinson, 2009). Expressed
17 To be clear, we are by no means claiming that this set of parameters exists in the brains of speakers. We are
talking here about a scheme for modeling the dynamics of the cultural evolution of human communicative systems.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
otherwise, relative to earlier generations of users of a particular communicative system, individuals
in subsequent generations may be advantaged with respect to the range of communicative
constructions that can be used to disambiguate mental states (Angus & Newton, 2015; perhaps,
e.g., by coming to distinguish among previously undistinguished actions; Senghas, 2003). That is,
communicative constructions themselves evolve to ‘fit,’ or gather evidence for, the adaptive priors
favored by evolution and the specific demands of the local ecological niche (Christiansen &
Chater, 2008; Kirby, Dowman, & Griffiths, 2007; Perfors & Navarro, 2014). This means that, over
historical time, processes of cumulative cultural evolution (e.g., Henrich, 2015; Richerson & Boyd,
2005) tend to increase the deontic value of constructions by increasing the expressivity and
complexity of using and learning such constructions (for similar viewpoints, see Christiansen &
Chater, 2016a; Cornish, Tamariz, & Kirby, 2009; Dingemanse, Blasi, Lupyan, Christiansen, &
Monaghan, 2015; Fay et al., 2018; Kirby et al., 2015; Tamariz & Kirby, 2016).
Cooperative communication emerges as a multiscale, self-organizing process that unfolds
simultaneously across interaction, ontogeny, and cultural evolution (also, de Boer, 2011).
Consequently, the adaptive prior under consideration enables, drives, and sustains each scale of
dynamics. Circularly, each scale of dynamics generates actions that appear to gather evidence for
the adaptive prior. Across developmental time, the contextualizing dynamics of cultural evolution
appear as a higher-order attractor – itself evolving in time, but sufficiently stable from the
perspective of the developing individual – towards which individuals converge via recurrent
engagement in coupled action-perception cycles that unfold in real-time. Taken together,
interlocked dynamics at these three scales entrench the existence (i.e., probability) of the adaptive
prior. In this way, cooperative communication becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. That is, by
gathering evidence for their adaptive priors, the low-level dynamics of interactants appear to create
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
and maintain, at least for some period, the observable coherence of a contextualizing scale of
(cultural) organization; namely, a communicative system (also see Szathmáry, 2015).
In active inference, the partitioning in the timescales that characterize a communicative
system is formalized as between-scale differences in the precision of prior beliefs as one ascends
scales (Constant et al., 2018; Ramstead et al., 2018). This is the result of, e.g., increasing the
number of components (Smith et al., 2017) and the connectivity between components constituting
a communicative system (Reali, Chater, & Christiansen, 2018). This means that linear
modifications to inputs to the system are associated with nonlinear changes in its dynamics
(Beckner et al., 2009; Shuai & Gong, 2014). Nonlinearity is an inherent property of self-organizing
systems (Prigogine & Stengers, 1984) and manifests in phenomena like critical slowing (i.e., phase
transition; Gandhi, Levin, & Orszag, 1998; i Cancho & Solé, 2003), parameter reduction (Riley,
Richardson, Shockley, & Ramenzoni, 2011), and chaotic dynamics (Sanders, Farmer, & Galla,
2018). A change in the characteristic timescale of the dynamics of a cooperative communicative
system is exemplified by Smith et al. (2017). These authors report experimental and simulation
results suggesting that multi-person communicative systems exhibit slower regularization
(decrease in conditional entropy) of a plurality marker across generations relative to
communicative systems constituted by a single individual (for discussion of disparities of the pace
of change across communicative systems, see Gray, Greenhill, & Atkinson, 2013).
As noted above, the evolution of a communicative system may be cast as motion through
a design space of communicative systems. Such spaces are effectively equivalent to the linguistic
morphospace (Gray et al., 2013), or the space of states taken on by human communicative systems
(e.g., linguistic networks; Seoane and Solé, 2018). Motion in design space may be relatively
simple. For instance, Bybee (2010) has suggested that processes of grammaticalization – where
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
flexible lexical forms gradually transition to fixed grammatical forms – may be modelled in terms
of unidirectional (i.e., irreversible) motion through a continuous parameter space (also see
Haspelmath, 1999). This might be modelled as a strange (Lorentz) attractor (Bybee, 2010), similar
to that observed in models of communicative alignment (Friston & Frith, 2015a). In some cases,
this motion may be more complex. For instance, the selection pressures acting on a system’s
constructions and, hence, the evolutionary trajectory of that set of constructions, varies as a
function of the size of the population of speakers (Fay & Ellison, 2013; Lupyan & Dale, 2010;
Reali et al., 2018; see Dingemanse et al., 2015).
In sum, the cultural niche construction implicit in free energy minimization in an ensemble
of communicating conspecifics can be seen as a form of active inference on a (cultural)
evolutionary level. In other words, selection pressures are just free energy gradients that allow us
to cast selection (for useful communicative constructions) as a process of Bayesian model selection
to maximize fitness; i.e., model evidence or the probability of communicative exchange, under a
shared generative (phenotypic) model. This perspective nicely combines structure learning,
evolution, and niche construction within the same formalism. For further discussion, please see
Campbell (2016), Constant et al. (2018), Frank (2012), and Sella and Hirsh (2005).
Future Directions and Conclusion
In this article, we have outlined an extension to existing theories of cooperative
communication. Our extension is based on active inference and provides a novel, integrative take
on the biobehavioral underpinnings of cooperative communication that complements existing
psychological accounts (Tomasello, 2003; 2008; 2014; 2019). A more complete account of the
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
dynamics entailed by the adaptive prior for alignment requires an integrative approach to research.
To be sufficient, such research must aim to encapsulate the various timescales from which this
prior emerges, particularly in a way that renders each scale of analysis complementary and
mutually constraining with respect to the others (Badcock et al., 2019b; Ramstead et al., 2018;
Tinbergen, 1963). The initial, though surely not exclusive, timescales of interest for cooperative
communication were outlined in this paper. These range from the evolutionary history of early
humans, to the intergenerational transmission of cultural patterns, down to individual
development, and to two people conversing in real-time. cultural patterns, down to individual
development, and to two people conversing in real-time. This multiscale framework, arising from
and underwriting the dynamics of the adaptive prior for alignment, should help to facilitate an
understanding of inter- and intracultural similarities and differences in the structure and function
of culture, mind, and brain. We conclude with a few comments about the limitations of the current
proposal for the adaptive prior for alignment.
One limitation is the relative dearth of ‘direct’ evidence generated by empirical and
computational studies of cooperative communication – guided by the notion of an adaptive prior
for alignment. We admit this is an important weakness, although one which can only be remedied
through future research. Nevertheless, we have reviewed a substantial amount of indirect evidence
generated by a range of empirical and simulation studies that speak to the integrative potential of
the adaptive prior for alignment in making sense of cooperative communication.
For instance, our approach can be used to model the neuronal message-passing
underwriting cooperative communication, as implied by active inference (e.g., Bastos et al., 2012;
Parr & Friston, 2018). To illustrate this, regions in higher layers of cortex, such as anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC; van den Heuvel & Sporns, 2013), integrate limbic afferents encoding
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
salience with control policies issued by motor cortex (Friston et al., 2014b; Pezzulo et al., 2018).
In turn, descending connections from paralimbic cortex convey signals that are unpacked as
hierarchically nested sequences of cooperatively motivated action and inference, such as
declarative pointing (Brunetti et al., 2014; see Apps, Rushworth, & Chang, 2016; Chambon et al.,
2017; Haroush & Williams, 2015; Holroyd & Yeung, 2012; Lavin et al., 2013). Interestingly, these
neural considerations align with the psychological suggestions of Hare and Tomasello (2005), who
suggest that early human selection pressures favored novel limbic dynamics that encode an
increased tolerance and trust for conspecifics in the context of food (see the self-domestication
hypothesis; Hare, 2017).
One specific, promising modelling approach pertains the usage of hierarchies of stable
heteroclinic channels (SHCs; e.g., Rabinovich, Varona, Tristan, & Afraimovich, 2014). SHCs are
neuronally plausible models of hierarchically deep sequences (i.e., state trajectories of state
trajectories) that may be scaled up to account for the acquisition and processing of more realistic
cooperative communication data than have thus far been examined (Kiebel et al., 2009; see
Rabinovich, Simmons, & Varona, 2015). In particular, it may be possible to use such a scheme to
model the processing and use of communicative constructions, as these are hierarchically deep
sequences of sequences (i.e., constructions are a statistically reliable ordering or ‘chunk’ of, e.g.,
word classes that entail chunks of morphemes that entail chunks of phonemes; relatedly, see
‘chunk and pass’ processing; Christiansen & Chater, 2016b). Indeed, the (re)use of hierarchical
processing for language use may represent one instance of cooperativized, domain-general
cognition exapted for usage in a cooperative social milieu. This is evidenced, for instance, by the
presence of hierarchical processing of an artificial communication system in infants before nine
months of age (Kovács & Endress, 2014). Such a (developing) processing capacity may then be
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
biased by the adaptive prior for alignment, after nine to twelve months of age, towards
disambiguating hierarchically organized communicative constructions (see Elman, 1993).
Another limitation of our proposal is that our consideration of the ontogenetic trajectory of
cooperative communication focused exclusively on its typical trajectory. This was due to concerns
about space. We readily acknowledge that there are all kinds of species atypical (i.e., unexpected)
trajectories for the phenotypic expression of the adaptive prior for alignment (indeed, this is one
of the reasons it is so interesting to study!). Arguably, studying how the dynamics of the adaptive
prior for alignment may be perturbed in ontogenesis is crucial (e.g., discerning neurocomputational
atypicalities or atypicalities in local niche dynamics; Thomas et al., 2019). Gaining a fuller grasp
on the adaptive prior for alignment requires the integration of data and theory not just ‘vertically’
(i.e., across scales), but also ‘horizontally’ between the niche and its denizens. That is, the adaptive
prior for alignment manifests distinctively not only across an array of timescales, but also at any
given time across an array of cultural settings and, within cultures, neurotypical and neurodiverse
populations.
For instance, in section 4, we discussed how, in neurotypical individuals, adequately
explaining away sensory causes depends on a delicate, finely tuned balance of the top-down
precision of hypotheses and the bottom-up precision of sensory fluctuations. But consider the case
of autism, where neurocomputational atypicalities are thought to render the individual
oversensitive to incoming error signals (Lawson, Rees, & Friston, 2014; Mirza, Adams, Friston,
& Parr, 2019; see also Thomas et al., 2016). Such individuals would still expect to align mental
states (Jaswal & Akhtar, 2019), and so would attend to others’ communicative behaviors, but
would be unable to attenuate the precision of sensory signals (Hadjikhani et al., 2017; Mirza et al.,
2019).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Consequently, during initial interactive couplings, such individuals might initially look like
they are typically developing (i.e., attending to others’ eye gaze; Young, Marin, Rogers, &
Ozonoff, 2009). However, repeated attention to sources of sensory uncertainty (e.g., others’
saccades), combined with an inability to adequately leverage predictions to explain away this
uncertainty (owing to too much sensory precision), means that such individuals may develop
idiosyncratic or atypical phenotypic expressions of the adaptive prior for alignment (e.g., avoiding
eye gaze; Tanaka & Sung, 2015). In other words, early atypicalities in the internal dynamics
generating evidence gathering cycles of action-perception may have downstream effects on joint
attentional skills (Charman et al., 1997; Nyström et al., 2019), attunement to and use of
communicative action policies (Loveland & Landry, 1986; Warlaumont, Richards, Gilkerson, &
Oller, 2014), mental state inference (Tager-Flusberg, 2007), and other means for alignment
(Heasman & Gillespie, 2019). In short, aberrant inference in a prosocial, developmental setting
may easily lead to a pernicious kind of dyslexia – not for the written word – but for any
communicative exchange (i.e., joint inference).
In summary, the adaptive prior for alignment ‘sets the tone,’ as it were, for species-typical
patterns of evidence gathering, about oneself and the (social) world, that unfold over different
timescales. The adaptive prior for alignment is, in effect, a kind of ‘best guess’ about the state
occupied by the system at any point in time. Thus, for a human, processes of action, inference,
learning, and (cultural) niche construction appear as if they were, on average across time, in the
service of gathering evidence for the hypothesis that ‘I’ am like ‘you’, that ‘you’ are like ‘me’, and
that ‘we’ exist.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Acknowledgements
We thank Michael J. Farrar, Robert D’Amico, Andreas Keil, Michael Tomasello, Leon Li, and
Josh Perlin for helpful commentary, discussion, and feedback on early drafts of the manuscript.
This research was produced thanks in part to funding from the Canada First Research Excellence
Fund, awarded to McGill University for the Healthy Brains for Healthy Lives initiative (S. P. L.
Veissière and M. J. D. Ramstead), as well as a Postgraduate Research Scholarship in the
Philosophy of Biomedicine as part of the ARC Australian Laureate Fellowship project A
Philosophy of Medicine for the 21st Century (Ref: FL170100160) (A. Constant), a Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council doctoral fellowship (Ref: 752-2019-0065) (A. Constant), a
Joseph-Armand Bombardier Canada Doctoral Scholarship and a Michael Smith Foreign Study
Supplements award from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (M. J.
D. Ramstead), and by a Wellcome Principal Research Fellowship (K. J. Friston – Ref:
088130/Z/09/Z).
Author Contributions Statement
JV and MJDR conceptualized the work for the paper and JV identified the paper’s main target,
i.e., cooperative communication. JV, PB, and MJDR worked out the argument and planned the
paper. JV wrote the first draft of the manuscript. PB and AC helped with conceptualization work.
AC drafted parts of section 3. PB helped edit the paper. KF and MJDR ensured that the technical
aspects of the paper were presented accurately.
Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
References
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., & K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands: active inference in the
motor system. Brain Structure & Function, 218(3), 611–643.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5
Anderson, M. L. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental organizational principle of the brain. The
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(4), 245–266; discussion 266-313.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X10000853
Angus, S. D., & Newton, J. (2015). Emergence of Shared Intentionality Is Coupled to the
Advance of Cumulative Culture. PLoS Computational Biology, 11(10), e1004587.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004587
Apps, M. A. J., Rushworth, M. F. S., & Chang, S. W. C. (2016). The Anterior Cingulate Gyrus
and Social Cognition: Tracking the Motivation of Others. Neuron, 90(4), 692–707.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.04.018
Ashley, J., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Cooperative problem-solving and teaching in preschoolers.
Social Development , 7(2), 143–163. Retrieved from
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1467-9507.00059
Attias, H. (2003). Planning by Probabilistic Inference. Proc. of the 9th Int. Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Atzil, S., Hendler, T., & Feldman, R. (2014). The brain basis of social synchrony. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 9(8), 1193–1202. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst105
Atzil, S., Touroutoglou, A., Rudy, T., Salcedo, S., Feldman, R., Hooker, J. M., … Barrett, L. F.
(2017). Dopamine in the medial amygdala network mediates human bonding. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 114(9), 2361–2366.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1612233114
Auksztulewicz, R., Barascud, N., Cooray, G., Nobre, A. C., Chait, M., & Friston, K. (2017). The
Cumulative Effects of Predictability on Synaptic Gain in the Auditory Processing Stream.
The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 37(28),
6751–6760. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0291-17.2017
Aureli, T., & Presaghi, F. (2010). Developmental trajectories for mother--infant coregulation in
the second year of life. Infancy: The Official Journal of the International Society on Infant
Studies, 15(6), 557–585. Retrieved from
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1532-7078.2010.00034.x
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things with Words. New York: Oxford University Press.
Axelsson, E. L., Churchley, K., & Horst, J. S. (2012). The right thing at the right time: why
ostensive naming facilitates word learning. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 88.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00088
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy hypothesis: a functional
explanation for relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in
spontaneous speech. Language and Speech, 47(Pt 1), 31–56.
https://doi.org/10.1177/00238309040470010201
Bach, P., Nicholson, T., & Hudson, M. (2014). The affordance-matching hypothesis: how
objects guide action understanding and prediction. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8,
254. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00254
Badcock, P. B. (2012). Evolutionary systems theory: A unifying meta-theory of psychological
science. Review of General Psychology: Journal of Division 1, of the American
Psychological Association, 16(1).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2019a). The hierarchically mechanistic
mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche. Physics of Life Reviews.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., Ramstead, M. J. D., Ploeger, A., & Hohwy, J. (2019b). The
hierarchically mechanistic mind: an evolutionary systems theory of the human brain,
cognition, and behavior. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-019-00721-3
Baker, C.L., Tenenbaum, J.B. (2014). Modeling Human Plan Recognition Using Bayesian
Theory of Mind. In Sukthankar, G., Geib, C., Bui, H.H., Pynadath, D.V., Goldman, R.P.
(Eds.), Plan, Activity, and Intent Recognition. Morgan Kaufmann, Boston (pp. 177-204).
Bannard, C., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Modeling children’s early grammatical
knowledge. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 106(41), 17284–17289. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0905638106
Bannard, C., Rosner, M., & Matthews, D. (2017). What’s Worth Talking About? Information
Theory Reveals How Children Balance Informativeness and Ease of Production.
Psychological Science, 28(7), 954–966. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797617699848
Barlow, H.B. (1974). Inductive inference, coding, perception, and language. Perception, 3, 123-
134.
Baronchelli, A., Chater, N., Christiansen, M. H., & Pastor-Satorras, R. (2013). Evolution in a
changing environment. PloS One, 8(1), e52742.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052742
Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., & Friston, K. J. (2012).
Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76(4), 695–711.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038
Baumard, N., André, J.-B., & Sperber, D. (2013). A mutualistic approach to morality: the
evolution of fairness by partner choice. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(1), 59–78.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X11002202
Beckner, C., Blythe, R., Bybee, J., Christiansen, M. H., Croft, W., Ellis, N. C., … Schoenemann,
T. (2009). Language is a complex adaptive system: Position paper. Language Learning,
59(s1), 1–26.
Begus, K., Gliga, T., & Southgate, V. (2014). Infants learn what they want to learn: responding
to infant pointing leads to superior learning. PloS One, 9(10), e108817.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108817
Begus, K., Gliga, T., & Southgate, V. (2016). Infants’ preferences for native speakers are
associated with an expectation of information. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 113(44), 12397–12402.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1603261113
Begus, K., & Southgate, V. (2012). Infant pointing serves an interrogative function.
Developmental Science, 15(5), 611–617. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01160.x
Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2005). One-year-olds comprehend the
communicative intentions behind gestures in a hiding game. Developmental Science, 8(6),
492–499.
Berwick, R. C., Friederici, A. D., Chomsky, N., & Bolhuis, J. J. (2013). Evolution, brain, and the
nature of language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(2), 89–98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.12.002
Bjorklund, D. F. (1997). The role of immaturity in human development. Psychological Bulletin,
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
122(2), 153–169. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.122.2.153
Bjorklund, D. F., & Ellis, B. J. (2014). Children, childhood, and development in evolutionary
perspective. Developmental Review, 34(3), 225–264.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2014.05.005
Blei, D. M., Kucukelbir, A., & McAuliffe, J. D. (2017). Variational Inference: A Review for
Statisticians. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 112(518), 859–877.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773
Bolt, N. K., & Loehr, J. D. (2017). The predictability of a partner’s actions modulates the sense
of joint agency. Cognition, 161, 60–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.01.004
Botvinick, M., Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends Cogn Sci., 16, 485-488.
Bratman, M. E. (1992). Shared Cooperative Activity. The Philosophical Review, 101(2), 327–
341. Retrieved from https://www.pdcnet.org/phr/content/phr_1992_0101_0002_0327_0341
Brownell, C. A. (2011). Early Developments in Joint Action. Review of Philosophy and
Psychology, 2(2), 193–211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-011-0056-1
Brownell, C. A., & Carriger, M. S. (1990). Changes in cooperation and self-other differentiation
during the second year. Child Development, 61(4), 1164–1174.
Brownell, C. A., Ramani, G. B., & Zerwas, S. (2006). Becoming a social partner with peers:
cooperation and social understanding in one- and two-year-olds. Child Development, 77(4),
803–821. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00904.x
Brownell, C. A., & The Early Social Development Research Lab. (2016). Prosocial Behavior in
Infancy: The Role of Socialization. Child Development Perspectives, 10(4), 222–227.
https://doi.org/10.1111/cdep.12189
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: the
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 2417–
2444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., Parr, T., van Maanen, L., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Free-energy
minimization in joint agent-environment systems: A niche construction perspective. Journal
of Theoretical Biology, 455, 161–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.07.002
Brunetti, M., Zappasodi, F., Marzetti, L., Perrucci, M. G., Cirillo, S., Romani, G. L., … Aureli,
T. (2014). Do you know what I mean? Brain oscillations and the understanding of
communicative intentions. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 36.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00036
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy principle for
action and perception: A mathematical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 81,
55–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2017.09.004
Bullinger, A. F., Zimmermann, F., Kaminski, J., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Different social
motives in the gestural communication of chimpanzees and human children. Developmental
Science, 14(1), 58–68. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00952.x
Butko, N. J., & Movellan, J. R. (2010). Detecting contingencies: an infomax approach. Neural
Networks: The Official Journal of the International Neural Network Society, 23(8-9), 973–
984. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2010.09.001
Butler, L. P., & Tomasello, M. (2016). Two- and 3-year-olds integrate linguistic and pedagogical
cues in guiding inductive generalization and exploration. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 145, 64–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2015.12.001
Bybee, J. (2003). Cognitive processes in grammaticalization. In M. Tomasello (Ed.), The New
Psychology of Language (pp. 159–182).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Bybee, J. (2010). Language, Usage and Cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Byrge, L., Sporns, O., & Smith, L. B. (2014). Developmental process emerges from extended
brain-body-behavior networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(8), 395–403.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.010
Call, J. (2009). Contrasting the social cognition of humans and nonhuman apes: the shared
intentionality hypothesis. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(2), 368–379.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01025.x
Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (Eds.). (2007). The gestural communication of apes and monkeys. New
York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Callaghan, T., Moll, H., Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., Liszkowski, U., Behne, T., & Tomasello,
M. (2011). Early social cognition in three cultural contexts. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 76(2), vii–viii, 1–142. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
5834.2011.00603.x
Campbell, J. O. (2016). Universal Darwinism as a process of Bayesian inference. Frontiers in
Systems Neuroscience, 10(49).
Carpenter, M., & Call, J. (2013). How joint is the joint attention of apes and human infants? In J.
Metcalfe & H. S. Terrence (Eds.), Agency and Joint Attention (pp. 49–61).
Carpenter, M., & Liebal, K. (2011). Joint attention, communication, and knowing together in
infancy. In S. Seemann (Ed.), Joint Attention: New Developments in Psychology,
Philosophy of Mind, and Social Neuroscience (pp. 159–181).
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and
communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Research in Child Development, 63(4), i – vi, 1–143.
Chambon, V., Domenech, P., Jacquet, P. O., Barbalat, G., Bouton, S., Pacherie, E., … Farrer, C.
(2017). Neural coding of prior expectations in hierarchical intention inference. Scientific
Reports, 7(1), 1278. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-01414-y
Charman, T., Swettenham, J., Baron-Cohen, S., Cox, A., Baird, G., & Drew, A. (1997). Infants
with autism: An investigation of empathy, pretend play, joint attention, and imitation.
Developmental Psychology, 33(5), 781–789. https://doi.org/10.1037//0012-1649.33.5.781
Chiel, H. J., & Beer, R. D. (1997). The brain has a body: adaptive behavior emerges from
interactions of nervous system, body and environment. Trends in Neurosciences, 20(12),
553–557. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9416664
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as shaped by the brain. The Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 31(5), 489–508; discussion 509–558.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X08004998
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2016a). Creating Language: Integrating Evolution,
Acquisition, and Processing. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2016b). The Now-or-Never bottleneck: A fundamental
constraint on language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 39, e62.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X1500031X
Christiansen, M. H., & Kirby, S. (2003). Language evolution: consensus and controversies.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(7), 300–307. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12860188
Chukoskie, L., Snider, J., Mozer, M. C., Krauzlis, R. J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2013). Learning
where to look for a hidden target. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
United States of America, 110 Suppl 2, 10438–10445.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1301216110
Cisek, P. (2007). Cortical mechanisms of action selection: the affordance competition
hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences, 362(1485), 1585–1599. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2007.2054
Clark, A. (2006). Language, embodiment, and the cognitive niche. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
10(8), 370–374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.06.012
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension.
Retrieved from https://market.android.com/details?id=book-n5wRDAAAQBAJ
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive
science. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–204.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M.
Levine, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149).
Washington, DC, US: American Psychological Association.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22(1),
1–39. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3709088
Cohen, E. (2012). The Evolution of Tag-Based Cooperation in Humans: The Case for Accent.
Current Anthropology, 53(5), 588-616. doi: 10.1086/667654
Colonnesi, C., Stams, G. J. J. M., Koster, I., & Noom, M. J. (2010). The relation between
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
pointing and language development: A meta-analysis. Developmental Review, 30(4), 352–
366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2010.10.001
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., Campbell, J. O., & Friston, K. J. (2018). A
variational approach to niche construction. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / the
Royal Society, 15(141). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Constant, A., Ramstead, M., Veissière, S., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Regimes of Expectations: An
Active Inference Model of Social Conformity and Decision Making. Frontiers in
Psychology. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
Constant, A., Clark, A., Kirchhoff, M., Friston, K.J. (in press). Extended active inference:
Constructing predictive cognition beyond skulls. Mind and Language.
Cornish, H., Tamariz, M., & Kirby, S. (2009). Complex Adaptive Systems and the Origins of
Adaptive Structure: What Experiments Can Tell Us. Language Learning, 59, 187–205.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2009.00540.x
Cover, T. M., & Thomas, J. A. (1991). Elements of Information Theory. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing Communicative Intentions in Infancy. Mind & Language, 25(2),
141–168. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0017.2009.01384.x
Dąbrowska, E. (2015). What exactly is Universal Grammar, and has anyone seen it? Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 852. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00852
de Boer, B. (2011). Self‐organization and language evolution. In K. Gibson & M. Tallerman
(Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Language Evolution, 4th Ed. (pp. 612–620).
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199541119.013.0063
de Bordes, P. F., Cox, R. F. A., Hasselman, F., & Cillessen, A. H. N. (2013). Toddlers’ gaze
following through attention modulation: intention is in the eye of the beholder. Journal of
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Experimental Child Psychology, 116(2), 443–452.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2012.09.008
Dediu, D., Cysouw, M., Levinson, S. C., Baronchelli, A., Christiansen, M. H., Croft, W., …
Others. (2013). Cultural evolution of language. In M. H. Christiansen & P. Richerson
(Eds.), Cultural Evolution: Society, Technology, Language, and Religion. Strüngmann
Forum Reports, Vol. 12 (pp. 303–332).
Demirdjian, D., Taycher, L., Shakhnarovich, G., Grauman, K., Darrell, T., Ieee Computer,
S.O.C. (2005). Avoiding the "streetlight effect": Tracking by exploring likelihood modes.
Tenth Ieee International Conference on Computer Vision, Vols 1 and 2 (pp. 357-364).
Devaine, M., Hollard, G., Daunizeau, J. (2014). Theory of Mind: Did Evolution Fool Us? PLOS
ONE, 9, e87619.
Dikker, S., Wan, L., Davidesco, I., Kaggen, L., Oostrik, M., McClintock, J., … Poeppel, D.
(2017). Brain-to-Brain Synchrony Tracks Real-World Dynamic Group Interactions in the
Classroom. Current Biology, 27(9), 1375–1380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.04.002
Dingemanse, M., Blasi, D. E., Lupyan, G., Christiansen, M. H., & Monaghan, P. (2015).
Arbitrariness, Iconicity, and Systematicity in Language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
19(10), 603–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.07.013
Dunham, Y. (2018). Mere Membership. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(9), 780-793. doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2018.06.004
Duguid, S., Wyman, E., Bullinger, A. F., Herfurth-Majstorovic, K., & Tomasello, M. (2014).
Coordination strategies of chimpanzees and human children in a Stag Hunt game.
Proceedings. Biological Sciences / The Royal Society, 281(1796), 20141973.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.1973
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Eckerman, C. O., Davis, C. C., & Didow, S. M. (1989). Toddlers’ emerging ways of achieving
social coordinations with a peer. Child Development, 60(2), 440–453. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2924660
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural networks: The importance of starting
small. Cognition, 48(1), 71–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(93)90058-4
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language universals: language diversity and its
importance for cognitive science. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(5), 429–448;
discussion 448–494. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0999094X
Fay, N., Arbib, M., & Garrod, S. (2013). How to bootstrap a human communication system.
Cognitive Science, 37(7), 1356–1367. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12048
Fay, N., & Ellison, T. M. (2013). The cultural evolution of human communication systems in
different sized populations: usability trumps learnability. PloS One, 8(8), e71781.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0071781
Fay, N., Ellison, T. M., Tylén, K., Fusaroli, R., Walker, B., & Garrod, S. (2018). Applying the
cultural ratchet to a social artefact: The cumulative cultural evolution of a language game.
Evolution and Human Behavior: Official Journal of the Human Behavior and Evolution
Society, 39(3), 300–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2018.02.002
Fay, N., Garrod, S., Roberts, L., & Swoboda, N. (2010). The interactive evolution of human
communication systems. Cognitive Science, 34(3), 351–386. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-
6709.2009.01090.x
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 4, 215. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Feldman, R. (2015). The adaptive human parental brain: implications for children’s social
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
development. Trends in Neurosciences, 38(6), 387–399.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2015.04.004
Feldman, R. (2017). The Neurobiology of Human Attachments. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
21(2), 80–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.11.007
Fillmore, C. J., Kay, P., & O’Connor, M. C. (1988). Regularity and Idiomaticity in Grammatical
Constructions: The Case of Let Alone. Language, 64(3), 501–538.
https://doi.org/10.2307/414531
Fonagy, P., Allison, E. (2014). The role of mentalizing and epistemic trust in the therapeutic
relationship. Psychotherapy, 51, 372-380.
Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of
interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1), 3–28.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15294145.2017.1294031
Frank, S.A. (2012). Natural selection. V. How to read the fundamental equations of evolutionary
change in terms of information theory. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 25, 2377-2396.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Inferring word meanings by assuming that speakers are
informative. Cognitive Psychology, 75, 80–96.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2014.08.002
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2011b) Embodied Inference: Or “I think therefore I am, if I am what I think.” In W.
Tschacher & C. Bergomi (Eds.), The implications of embodiment (Cognition and
Communication) (pp. 89–125).
Friston, K. (2012). A Free Energy Principle for Biological Systems. Entropy , 14, 2100–2121.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e14112100
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / the Royal
Society, 10(86), 20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., Adams, R. A., Perrinet, L., & Breakspear, M. (2012). Perceptions as hypotheses:
saccades as experiments. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 151.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00151
Friston, K., & Ao, P. (2012). Free energy, value, and attractors. Computational and
Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 2012, 937860. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/937860
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active
Inference: A Process Theory. Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49.
https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., & Frith, C. (2015a). A Duet for one. Consciousness and Cognition, 36, 390–405.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K., & Frith, C. D. (2015b). Active inference, communication and hermeneutics. Cortex;
a Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior, 68, 129–143.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2015.03.025
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active
inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2017). Deep temporal models and
active inference. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 77, 388–402.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.04.009
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., & Dolan, R. J.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
(2014). The anatomy of choice: dopamine and decision-making. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 369(1655).
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0481
Gadamer, H.-G. (2003). Truth and Method. Retrieved from
https://market.android.com/details?id=book-CqpXPgAACAAJ
Gallagher, S., & Allen, M. (2018). Active inference, enactivism and the hermeneutics of social
cognition. Synthese, 195(6), 2627–2648. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1269-8
Gallotti, M., & Frith, C. D. (2013). Social cognition in the we-mode. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 17(4), 160–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002
Gandhi, A., Levin, S., & Orszag, S. (1998). “Critical slowing down” in time-to-extinction: an
example of critical phenomena in ecology. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 192(3), 363–
376. https://doi.org/10.1006/jtbi.1998.0660
Ganea, P. A., & Saylor, M. M. (2007). Infants’ use of shared linguistic information to clarify
ambiguous requests. Child Development, 78(2), 493–502. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
8624.2007.01011.x
Gencaga, D., Knuth, K., & Rossow, W. (2015). A Recipe for the Estimation of Information Flow
in a Dynamical System. Entropy , 17(1), 438–470. https://doi.org/10.3390/e17010438
Gershman, S. J. (2017). On the blessing of abstraction. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology , 70(3), 361–365. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1159706
Gershman, S. J., Horvitz, E. J., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2015). Computational rationality: A
converging paradigm for intelligence in brains, minds, and machines. Science, 349(6245),
273–278. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac6076
Gilbert, M. (1990). Walking Together: A Paradigmatic Social Phenomenon. Midwest Studies In
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Philosophy, 15(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4975.1990.tb00202.x
Goldberg, A. E. (2003). Constructions: a new theoretical approach to language. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7(5), 219–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00080-9
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2007). Pointing sets the stage for learning language—and creating
language. Child Development, 78(3), 741–745. Retrieved from
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01029.x/full
Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2016). Pragmatic Language Interpretation as Probabilistic
Inference. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(11), 818–829.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.08.005
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of
Pragmatics, 32, 1489-1522.
Gräfenhain, M., Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Young Children’s
Understanding of Joint Commitments. Dev. Psychol., 45(5), 1430-1443. doi:
10.1037/a0016122
Grau-Moya, J., Hez, E., Pezzulo, G., & Braun, D. A. (2013). The effect of model uncertainty on
cooperation in sensorimotor interactions. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / the Royal
Society, 10(87), 20130554. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0554
Gray, R. D., Greenhill, S. J., & Atkinson, Q. D. (2013). Phylogenetic Models of Language
Change. Cultural Evolution, pp. 285–302.
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262019750.003.0015
Hadjikhani, N., Åsberg Johnels, J., Zürcher, N. R., Lassalle, A., Guillon, Q., Hippolyte, L.,
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Billstedt, E., Ward, N., Lemonnier, E., & Gillberg, C. (2017). Look me in the eyes:
Constraining gaze in the eye-region provokes abnormally high subcortical activation in
autism. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-03378-5
Han, S. (2015). Understanding cultural differences in human behavior: a cultural neuroscience
approach. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci., 3, 68-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2015.01.013
Han, T. A., Santos, F. C., Lenaerts, T., & Pereira, L. M. (2015). Synergy between intention
recognition and commitments in cooperation dilemmas. Scientific Reports, 5, 9312.
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep09312
Hare, B., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Human-like social skills in dogs? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9(9), 439–444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.07.003
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica D. Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1),
335–346.
Haroush, K., & Williams, Z. M. (2015). Neuronal prediction of opponent’s behavior during
cooperative social interchange in primates. Cell, 160(6), 1233–1245.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.045
Harris, P. L., Bartz, D. T., & Rowe, M. L. (2017). Young children communicate their ignorance
and ask questions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1620745114
Harris, P. L., & Corriveau, K. H. (2011). Young children’s selective trust in informants.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences,
366(1567), 1179–1187. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0321
Haspelmath, M. (1999). Why is grammaticalization irreversible? Linguistics and Philosophy,
37(6). https://doi.org/10.1515/ling.37.6.1043
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Hasson, U., & Frith, C. D. (2016). Mirroring and beyond: coupled dynamics as a generalized
framework for modelling social interactions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 371(1693).
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0366
Hasson, U., Ghazanfar, A. A., Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., & Keysers, C. (2012). Brain-to-brain
coupling: a mechanism for creating and sharing a social world. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 16(2), 114–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.007
Heasman, B., & Gillespie, A. (2019). Neurodivergent intersubjectivity: Distinctive features of
how autistic people create shared understanding. Autism, 23(4), 910–921.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361318785172
Heine, B., & Kuteva, T. (2002). On the Evolution of Grammatical Forms. In The Transition to
Language (pp. 376–397). Oxford University Press.
Henrich, J. (2015). The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution,
Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Henrich, J., & Gil-White, F. J. (2001). The evolution of prestige: Freely conferred deference as a
mechanism for enhancing the benefits of cultural transmission. Evolution and Human
Behavior: Official Journal of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society, 22(3), 165–196.
Hinton, G. E. (2007). Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
11(10), 428–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2007.09.004
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Owen, M. T., Golinkoff, R. M., Pace, A., …
Suma, K. (2015). The Contribution of Early Communication Quality to Low-Income
Children’s Language Success. Psychological Science, 26(7), 1071–1083.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797615581493
Höhl, S., Michel, C., Reid, V. M., Parise, E., & Striano, T. (2014). Eye contact during live
social interaction modulates infants’ oscillatory brain activity. Social Neuroscience, 9(3),
300–308. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2014.884982
Hohwy, J. (2016). The Self-Evidencing Brain. Noûs, 50, 259-285.
Holroyd, C. B., & Yeung, N. (2012). Motivation of extended behaviors by anterior cingulate
cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(2), 122–128.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.008
i Cancho, R. F., & Solé, R. V. (2003). Least effort and the origins of scaling in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(3), 788–791. Retrieved from
https://www.pnas.org/content/100/3/788?sid=
Jaswal, V. K., & Akhtar, N. (2019). Being versus appearing socially uninterested: Challenging
assumptions about social motivation in autism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 42.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X18001826
Jiang, J., Dai, B., Peng, D., Zhu, C., Liu, L., & Lu, C. (2012). Neural synchronization during
face-to-face communication. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the
Society for Neuroscience, 32(45), 16064–16069.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2926-12.2012
Kanai, R., Komura, Y., Shipp, S., & Friston, K. (2015). Cerebral hierarchies: predictive
processing, precision and the pulvinar. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 370(1668), 20140169. Retrieved from
http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/370/1668/20140169.abstract
Kanwal, J., Smith, K., Culbertson, J., & Kirby, S. (2017). Zipf’s Law of Abbreviation and the
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Principle of Least Effort: Language users optimise a miniature lexicon for efficient
communication. Cognition, 165, 45–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.05.001
Kao, J. T., Wu, J. Y., Bergen, L., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Nonliteral understanding of number
words. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
111(33), 12002–12007. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1407479111
Karmali, F., Whitman, G. T., & Lewis, R. F. (2018). Bayesian optimal adaptation explains age-
related human sensorimotor changes. Journal of Neurophysiology, 119(2), 509–520.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00710.2017
Kelso, J. A. S. (2016). On the Self-Organizing Origins of Agency. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
20(7), 490–499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.04.004
Kemmer, S. (2003). Human cognition and the elaboration of events: Some universal conceptual
categories. In M. Tomasello (Ed.), The New Psychology of Language, Vol. II (pp. 95–124).
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical
Bayesian models. Developmental Science, 10(3), 307–321. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
7687.2007.00585.x
Kidd, E., Donnelly, S., & Christiansen, M. H. (2018). Individual Differences in Language
Acquisition and Processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(2), 154–169.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.11.006
Kiebel, S. J., Daunizeau, J., & Friston, K. J. (2008). A hierarchy of time-scales and the brain.
PLoS Computational Biology, 4(11), e1000209.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000209
Kiebel, S. J., von Kriegstein, K., Daunizeau, J., & Friston, K. J. (2009). Recognizing sequences
of sequences. PLoS Computational Biology, 5(8), e1000464.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000464
Kinreich, S., Djalovski, A., Kraus, L., Louzoun, Y., & Feldman, R. (2017). Brain-to-Brain
Synchrony during Naturalistic Social Interactions. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 17060.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17339-5
Kirby, S., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2007). Innateness and culture in the evolution of
language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104(12), 5241–5245. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0608222104
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015). Compression and communication in the
cultural evolution of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141, 87–102.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.03.016
Kishimoto, T., Shizawa, Y., Yasuda, J., Hinobayashi, T., & Minami, T. (2007). Do pointing
gestures by infants provoke comments from adults? Infant Behavior & Development, 30(4),
562–567. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2007.04.001
Köster, M., Langeloh, M., Höhl, S. (2019). Visually Entrained Theta Oscillations Increase for
Unexpected Events in the Infant Brain. Psych. Sci., 30, 1656-1663.
Kovács, Á. M., & Endress, A. D. (2014). Hierarchical Processing in Seven-Month-Old Infants.
Infancy, 19(4), 409–425. https://doi.org/10.1111/infa.12052
Kovács, Á. M., Tauzin, T., Téglás, E., Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2014). Pointing as Epistemic
Request: 12-month-olds Point to Receive New Information. Infancy: The Official Journal of
the International Society on Infant Studies, 19(6), 543–557.
https://doi.org/10.1111/infa.12060
Kovács, Á. M., Téglás, E., Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2017). Seeing behind the surface:
communicative demonstration boosts category disambiguation in 12-month-olds.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Developmental Science, 20(6). https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12485
Kuperberg, G. R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2016). What do we mean by prediction in language
comprehension? Lang., Cogn. Neurosci., 31(1), 32-59. doi:
10.1080/23273798.2015.1102299
Lavin, C., Melis, C., Mikulan, E., Gelormini, C., Huepe, D., & Ibañez, A. (2013). The anterior
cingulate cortex: an integrative hub for human socially-driven interactions. Frontiers in
Neuroscience, 7, 64. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00064
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553), 436–444.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: A Philosophical Study. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Liebal, K., Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Infants use shared experience to
interpret pointing gestures. Developmental Science, 12(2), 264–271.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00758.x
Liebal, K., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Infants’ Use of Shared Experience in
Declarative Pointing. Infancy, 15(5), 545–556. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-
7078.2009.00028.x
Liebenberg, L. (2006). Persistence hunting by modern hunter-gatherers. Current Anthropology,
47(6), 1017–1026. Retrieved from
https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/508695
Lieven, E. (2016). Usage-based approaches to language development: Where do we go from
here? Language and Cognition, 8(3), 346–368. https://doi.org/10.1017/langcog.2016.16
Lieven, E., & Stoll, S. (2013). Early Communicative Development in Two Cultures: A
Comparison of the Communicative Environments of Children from Two Cultures. Human
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Development, 56(3), 178–206. Retrieved from
https://www.karger.com/DOI/10.1159/000351073
Lindsay, L., Gambi, C., & Rabagliati, H. (2019). Preschoolers Optimize the Timing of Their
Conversational Turns Through Flexible Coordination of Language Comprehension and
Production. Psychological Science, 30(4), 504–515.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797618822802
Linsker, R. (1990). Perceptual neural organization: some approaches based on network models
and information theory. Annu Rev Neurosci., 13, 257-281.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Henning, A., Striano, T., & Tomasello, M. (2004). Twelve-
month-olds point to share attention and interest. Developmental Science, 7(3), 297–307.
Retrieved from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00349.x
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Reference and attitude in infant
pointing. Journal of Child Language, 34(1), 1–20. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17340936
Liszkowski, U., Schäfer, M., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Prelinguistic infants, but
not chimpanzees, communicate about absent entities. Psychological Science, 20(5), 654–
660. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02346.x
Liszkowski, U., Brown, P., Callaghan, T., Takada, A., & de Vos, C. (2012). A Prelinguistic
Gestural Universal of Human Communication. Cognitive Science, 36(4), 698–713.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01228.x
Liu, Y., Piazza, E. A., Simony, E., Shewokis, P. A., Onaral, B., Hasson, U., & Ayaz, H. (2017).
Measuring speaker–listener neural coupling with functional near infrared spectroscopy.
Scientific Reports, 7, 43293. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep43293
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Loveland, K. A., & Landry, S. H. (1986). Joint attention and language in autism and
developmental language delay. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 16(3),
335–349. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01531663
Lucca, K., & Wilbourn, M. P. (2018a). Communicating to Learn: Infants’ Pointing Gestures
Result in Optimal Learning. Child Development, 89(3), 941–960.
https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12707
Lucca, K., & Wilbourn, M. P. (2018b). The what and the how: Information-seeking pointing
gestures facilitate learning labels and functions. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2018.08.003
Lupyan, G., & Dale, R. (2010). Language structure is partly determined by social structure. PloS
One, 5(1), e8559. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0008559
MacKay, D.J., 1995. Free-energy minimisation algorithm for decoding and cryptoanalysis.
Electronics Letters, 31, 445-447.
MacLean, E. L. (2016). Unraveling the evolution of uniquely human cognition. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113(23), 6348–6354.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1521270113
Marno, H., Guellai, B., Vidal, Y., Franzoi, J., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (2016). Infants’
Selectively Pay Attention to the Information They Receive from a Native Speaker of Their
Language. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1150. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01150
Matthews, D., Behne, T., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2012). Origins of the human pointing
gesture: a training study. Developmental Science, 15(6), 817–829.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01181.x
McCauley, S. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2014). Prospects for usage-based computational
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
models of grammatical development: argument structure and semantic roles. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews. Cognitive Science, 5(4), 489–499.
https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1295
McClelland, J. L., Botvinick, M. M., Noelle, D. C., Plaut, D. C., Rogers, T. T., Seidenberg, M.
S., & Smith, L. B. (2010). Letting structure emerge: connectionist and dynamical systems
approaches to cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(8), 348–356.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.06.002
McClung, J. S., Placì, S., Bangerter, A., Clément, F., & Bshary, R. (2017). The language of
cooperation: shared intentionality drives variation in helping as a function of group
membership. Proceedings. Biological Sciences / The Royal Society, 284(1863).
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2017.1682
McLoone, B., & Smead, R. (2014). The ontogeny and evolution of human collaboration. Biology
& Philosophy, 29(4), 559–576. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-014-9435-1
McShea, D. W. (2016). Three Trends in the History of Life: An Evolutionary Syndrome.
Evolutionary Biology, 43(4), 531–542. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11692-015-9323-x
Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). “Like me”: a foundation for social cognition. Developmental Science,
10(1), 126–134. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00574.x
Meylan, S. C., Frank, M. C., Roy, B. C., & Levy, R. (2017). The Emergence of an Abstract
Grammatical Category in Children’s Early Speech. Psychological Science, 28(2), 181–192.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797616677753
Michael, J., Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2016). Observing joint action: Coordination creates
commitment. Cognition, 157, 106-113. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2016.08.024
Mirza, M.B., Adams, R.A., Mathys, C.D., Friston, K.J., (2016). Scene Construction, Visual
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Foraging, and Active Inference. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 10, 56.
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Friston, K., & Parr, T. (2019). Introducing a Bayesian model of
selective attention based on active inference. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1–22.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-50138-8
Mitani, J. (2009). Cooperation and Competition in Chimpanzees: Current Understanding and
Future Challenges. Evol. Anthropol., 18, 215-227.
Moll, H., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Fourteen‐month‐olds know what others
experience only in joint engagement. Developmental Science. Retrieved from
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00615.x/full
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Cooperation and human cognition: the Vygotskian
intelligence hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
B, Biological Sciences, 362(1480), 639–648. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2006.2000
Moran, R. J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2013).
Free energy, precision and learning: the role of cholinergic neuromodulation. The Journal of
Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 33(19), 8227–8236.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4255-12.2013
Moran, R. J., Symmonds, M., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2014). The brain ages optimally to
model its environment: evidence from sensory learning over the adult lifespan. PLoS
Computational Biology, 10(1), e1003422. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003422
Moseley, R., Carota, F., Hauk, O., Mohr, B., & Pulvermüller, F. (2012). A Role for the Motor
System in Binding Abstract Emotional Meaning. Cerebral Cortex, 22(7), 1634–1647.
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr238
Nakamura, M., & Ohtsuki, H. (2016). Optimal Decision Rules in Repeated Games Where
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Players Infer an Opponent’s Mind via Simplified Belief Calculation. Games, Vol. 7, p. 19.
https://doi.org/10.3390/g7030019
Nelson, J. D., Divjak, B., Gudmundsdottir, G., Martignon, L. F., & Meder, B. (2014). Children’s
sequential information search is sensitive to environmental probabilities. Cognition, 130(1),
74–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.09.007
Nyström, P., Thorup, E., Bölte, S., & Falck-Ytter, T. (2019). Joint Attention in Infancy and the
Emergence of Autism. Biological Psychiatry, 86(8), 631–638.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.05.006
Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2017). Working memory, attention, and salience in active inference.
Scientific Reports, 7(1), 14678. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-15249-0
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2018). The Anatomy of Inference: Generative Models and Brain
Structure. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 12, 90.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2018.00090
Pea, R. D. (1979). Can information theory explain early word choice. Journal of Child
Language, 6(3), 397–410. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/536407
Pecora, L. M., Carroll, T. L., & Heagy, J. F. (1995). Statistics for mathematical properties of
maps between time series embeddings. Physical Review. E, Statistical Physics, Plasmas,
Fluids, and Related Interdisciplinary Topics, 52(4), 3420–3439. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9963818
Pecora, L. M., Carroll, T. L., Johnson, G. A., Mar, D. J., & Heagy, J. F. (1997). Fundamentals of
synchronization in chaotic systems, concepts, and applications. Chaos , 7(4), 520–543.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.166278
Pérez, A., Carreiras, M., & Duñabeitia, J. A. (2017). Brain-to-brain entrainment: EEG interbrain
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
synchronization while speaking and listening. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 4190.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-04464-4
Perfors, A., & Navarro, D. J. (2014). Language evolution can be shaped by the structure of the
world. Cognitive Science, 38(4), 775–793. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12102
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Regier, T. (2011). The learnability of abstract syntactic
principles. Cognition, 118(3), 306–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.11.001
Perniss, P., & Vigliocco, G. (2014). The bridge of iconicity: from a world of experience to the
experience of language. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
B, Biological Sciences, 369(1651), 20130300. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0300
Pezzulo, G. (2011). Shared representations as coordination tools for interaction. Review of
Philosophy and Psychology. Retrieved from
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13164-011-0060-5
Pezzulo, G., Donnarumma, F., & Dindo, H. (2013). Human sensorimotor communication: a
theory of signaling in online social interactions. PloS One, 8(11), e79876.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0079876
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active Inference, homeostatic regulation and
adaptive behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17–35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical Active Inference: A Theory of
Motivated Control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(4), 294–306.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.01.009
Powers, A. R., III, Kelley, M., & Corlett, P. R. (2016). Hallucinations as top-down effects on
perception. Biological Psychiatry. Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 1(5), 393–
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpsc.2016.04.003
Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature. New
York, NY: Bantam New Age Books.
Pulvermüller, F. (2013). How neurons make meaning: Brain mechanisms for embodied and
abstract-symbolic semantics. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(9), 458–470.
Pulvermüller, F. (2015). Language, Action, Interaction: Neuropragmatic Perspectives on
Symbols, Meaning, and Context-Dependent Function. In Engel A. K., Friston, K. J.,
Kragic, D. (Ed.), The Pragmatic Turn: Toward Action-Oriented Views in Cognitive
Rabinovich, M. I., Simmons, A. N., & Varona, P. (2015). Dynamical bridge between brain and
mind. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(8), 453–461.
Rabinovich, M. I., Varona, P., Tristan, I., & Afraimovich, V. S. (2014). Chunking dynamics:
Heteroclinics in mind. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 8, 22.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2014.00022
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s question:
A free-energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Constant, A., Veissière, S. P. L., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Explaining the
Cooperative Human Phenotype: An Active Inference Approach to the Cooperative Turn.
Philosophical Psychology.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). Cultural Affordances:
Scaffolding Local Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention.
Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1090. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01090
Reali, F., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2018). Simpler grammar, larger vocabulary: How
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
population size affects language. Proceedings. Biological Sciences / The Royal Society,
285(1871). https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2017.2586
Reddy, V. (2003). On being the object of attention: implications for self–other consciousness.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(9), 397–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-
6613(03)00191-8
Rekers, Y., Haun, D. B. M., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Children, but not chimpanzees, prefer to
collaborate. Current Biology, 21(20), 1756–1758. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.066
Renzi, D. T., Romberg, A. R., Bolger, D. J., & Newman, R. S. (2017). Two minds are better than
one: Cooperative communication as a new framework for understanding infant language
learning. Translational Issues in Psychological Science, 3(1), 19. Retrieved from
http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/tps/3/1/19/
Rhodes, M., & Wellman, H. (2017). Moral learning as intuitive theory revision. Cognition, 167,
191–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2016.08.013
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2005). Not By Genes Alone. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Riley, M. A., Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K., & Ramenzoni, V. C. (2011). Interpersonal
synergies. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 38. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00038
Roepstorff, A., Niewöhner, J., & Beck, S. (2010). Enculturing brains through patterned practices.
Neural Networks: The Official Journal of the International Neural Network Society, 23(8),
1051–1059.
Romberg, A. R. & Saffran, J. R. (2010). Statistical leaning and language acquisition. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. Cogn. Sci., 1, 906-914. doi: 10.1002/wcs.78
Romeo, R. R., Leonard, J. A., Robinson, S. T., West, M. R., Mackey, A. P., Rowe, M. L., &
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2018). Beyond the 30-Million-Word Gap: Children’s Conversational
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Exposure Is Associated With Language-Related Brain Function. Psychological Science,
29(5), 700–710. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797617742725
Sanders, J. B. T., Farmer, J. D., & Galla, T. (2018). The prevalence of chaotic dynamics in
games with many players. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 4902. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
018-22013-5
Santos, F. C., Pacheco, J. M., & Skyrms, B. (2011). Co-evolution of pre-play signaling and
cooperation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 274(1), 30–35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.01.004
Saylor, M. M., & Ganea, P. (2007). Infants interpret ambiguous requests for absent objects.
Developmental Psychology, 43(3), 696–704. https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.43.3.696
Schegloff, E. A. (2006). Interaction: The infrastructure for social institutions, the natural
ecological niche for language, and the arena in which culture is enacted. In N.J. Enfield and
S.C. Levinson (Eds.), Roots of Human Sociality: Culture, Cognition and Interaction (pp.
70–96).
Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for self-correction in the
organization of repair in conversation. Language, 53(2), 361–382.
https://doi.org/10.1353/lan.1977.0041
Schelling, T. C. (1960). The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schilbach, L., Timmermans, B., Reddy, V., Costall, A., Bente, G., Schlicht, T., & Vogeley, K.
(2013). Toward a second-person neuroscience. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(4),
393–414. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000660
Schippers, M. B., Roebroeck, A., Renken, R., Nanetti, L., & Keysers, C. (2010). Mapping the
information flow from one brain to another during gestural communication. Proceedings of
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107(20), 9388–9393.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1001791107
Schmälzle, R., Häcker, F. E. K., Honey, C. J., & Hasson, U. (2015). Engaged listeners: shared
neural processing of powerful political speeches. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 10(8), 1137–1143. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsu168
Schmidhuber, J. (2010). Formal Theory of Creativity, Fun, and Intrinsic Motivation (1990-
2010). IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2, 230-247.
Schoot, L., Hagoort, P., & Segaert, K. (2016). What can we learn from a two-brain approach to
verbal interaction? Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 68, 454–459.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.009
Sella, G., Hirsh, A.E. (2005). The application of statistical physics to evolutionary biology. Proc
Natl Acad Sci., 102, 9541-9546.
Senghas, A. (2003). Intergenerational influence and ontogenetic development in the emergence
of spatial grammar in Nicaraguan Sign Language. Cognitive Development, 18(4), 511–531.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2003.09.006
Sengupta, B., Tozzi, A., Cooray, G. K., Douglas, P. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Towards a
Neuronal Gauge Theory. PLoS Biology, 14(3), e1002400.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002400
Seoane, L. F., & Solé, R. (2018). The morphospace of language networks. Scientific Reports,
8(1), 10465. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-28820-0
Sewell, W.H. (1992). A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and Transformation. American
Journal of Sociology, 98, 1-29.
Seyfarth, R. M., & Cheney, D. L. (2003). Signalers and receivers in animal communication.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 145–173.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.54.101601.145121
Shafto, P., Eaves, B., Navarro, D. J., & Perfors, A. (2012). Epistemic trust: Modeling children’s
reasoning about others’ knowledge and intent. Developmental Science, 15(3), 436–447.
Shenhav, A., Cohen, J. D., & Botvinick, M. M. (2016). Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the
value of control. Nature Neuroscience, 19(10), 1286–1291. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4384
Shuai, L., & Gong, T. (2014). Language as an emergent group-level trait. The Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 37(3), 274–275. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X13003026
Shweder, R. A., & Sullivan, M. A. (1993). Cultural Psychology: Who Needs It? Annu. Rev.
Psychol., 44, 497-523.
Siposova, B., & Carpenter, M. (2019). A new look at joint attention and common knowledge.
Cognition, 189, 260–274.
Siposova, B., Tomasello, M., & Carpenter, M. (2018). Communicative eye contact signals a
commitment to cooperate for young children. Cognition, 179, 192–201.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.06.010
Skyrms, B. (2001). The Stag Hunt. Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical
Association, 75(2), 31–41. https://doi.org/10.2307/3218711
Smith, K., Perfors, A., Fehér, O., Samara, A., Swoboda, K., & Wonnacott, E. (2017). Language
learning, language use and the evolution of linguistic variation. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 372(1711).
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0051
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance: Communication and Cognition. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1987). Précis of Relevance: Communication and Cognition. The
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 10(4), 697–710.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00055345
Stephens, G. J., Silbert, L. J., Hasson, U. (2010). Speaker–listener neural coupling underlies
successful communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA,
107(32), 14425-30.
Stolk, A., Noordzij, M. L., Verhagen, L., Volman, I., Schoffelen, J.-M., Oostenveld, R., … Toni,
I. (2014). Cerebral coherence between communicators marks the emergence of meaning.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(51),
18183–18188. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1414886111
Stolk, A., Verhagen, L., & Toni, I. (2016). Conceptual Alignment: How Brains Achieve Mutual
Understanding. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(3), 180–191.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.11.007
Striano, T., & Stahl, D. (2005). Sensitivity to triadic attention in early infancy. Developmental
Science, 8(4), 333–343. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00421.x
Suzuki, S. (1970/2014). Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind: Informal talks on Zen meditation and
practice. Shambhala, Boulder, CO.
Szathmáry, E. (2015). Toward major evolutionary transitions theory 2.0. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(33), 10104–10111.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1421398112
Szufnarowska, J., Rohlfing, K. J., Fawcett, C., & Gredebäck, G. (2014). Is ostension any more
than attention? Scientific Reports, 4, 5304. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep05304
Tager-Flusberg, H. (2007). Evaluating the Theory-of-Mind Hypothesis of Autism. Current
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Directions in Psychological Science, 16(6), 311–315. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
8721.2007.00527.x
Tamariz, M., & Kirby, S. (2016). The cultural evolution of language. Current Opinion in
Psychology, 8, 37–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2015.09.003
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman, N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind:
statistics, structure, and abstraction. Science, 331(6022), 1279–1285.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1192788
Thomas, M. S. C., Fedor, A., Davis, R., Yang, J., Alireza, H., Charman, T., Masterson, J., &
Best, W. (2019). Computational Modeling of Interventions for Developmental Disorders.
Psychological Review. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000151
Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.),
Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 103–130).
Tomasello, M. (2000). The item-based nature of children’s early syntactic development. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 156–163. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10740280
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A Usage-Based Approach to Child Language
Acquisition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2004). What kind of evidence could refute the UG hypothesis?: Commentary on
Wunderlich. Studies in Language. International Journal Sponsored by the Foundation
“Foundations of Language,” 28(3), 642–645.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of Human Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. (2014). A Natural History of Human Thinking. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Tomasello, M. (2018). How children come to understand false beliefs: A shared intentionality
account. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
115(34), 8491-8498. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1804761115
Tomasello, M. (2019). Becoming Human: A Theory of Ontogeny. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing
intentions: the origins of cultural cognition. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28(5), 675–
691; discussion 691–735. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05000129
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., & Liszkowski, U. (2007). A new look at infant pointing. Child
Development, 78(3), 705–722. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01025.x
Tomasello, M., & Haberl, K. (2003). Understanding attention: 12- and 18-month-olds know what
is new for other persons. Developmental Psychology, 39(5), 906–912. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12952402
Tomasello, M., Melis, A. P., Tennie, C., Wyman, E., & Herrmann, E. (2012). Two Key Steps in
the Evolution of Human Cooperation: The Interdependence Hypothesis. Current
Anthropology, 53(6), 673–692. https://doi.org/10.1086/668207
Tschacher, W., & Haken, H. (2007). Intentionality in non-equilibrium systems? The functional
aspects of self-organized pattern formation. New Ideas in Psychology, 25(1), 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2006.09.002
van den Heuvel, M. P., & Sporns, O. (2013). Network hubs in the human brain. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 17(12), 683–696. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.012
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2019).
Thinking Through Other Minds: A Variational Approach to Cognition and Culture. The
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Verhagen, A. (2007). Construal and perspectivisation. In D. Geeraerts and H. Cuyckens (Eds.),
The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics (48-81).
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental process. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Wallace, C.S., Dowe, D.L. (1999). Minimum Message Length and Kolmogorov Complexity. The
Computer Journal, 42, 270-283.
Warlaumont, A. S., Richards, J. A., Gilkerson, J., & Oller, D. K. (2014). A social feedback loop
for speech development and its reduction in autism. Psychological Science, 25(7), 1314–
1324. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797614531023
Whiten, A., & Erdal, D. (2012). The human socio-cognitive niche and its evolutionary origins.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences,
367(1599), 2119–2129. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0114
Wilcox, S. (2004). Language from gesture. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 27, pp. 525–
526. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x04470113
Williams, S., & Yaeger, L. (2017). Evolution of Neural Dynamics in an Ecological Model.
Geosciences Journal, 7(3), 49. https://doi.org/10.3390/geosciences7030049
Winters, J., Kirby, S., & Smith, K. (2018). Contextual predictability shapes signal autonomy.
Cognition, 176, 15–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.03.002
Wipf, D.P., Rao, B.D. (2007). An Empirical Bayesian Strategy for Solving the Simultaneous
Sparse Approximation Problem. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 55, 3704-
3716.
Wolpe, N., Ingram, J. N., Tsvetanov, K. A., Geerligs, L., Kievit, R. A., Henson, R. N., … Rowe,
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
J. B. (2016). Ageing increases reliance on sensorimotor prediction through structural and
functional differences in frontostriatal circuits. Nature Communications, 7, 13034.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13034
Wu, Z., & Gros-Louis, J. (2015). Caregivers provide more labeling responses to infants’ pointing
than to infants' object-directed vocalizations. Journal of Child Language, 42(3), 538–561.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000914000221
Wyman, E., Rakoczy, H., & Tomasello, M. (2013). Non-verbal communication enables
children’s coordination in a “Stag Hunt” game. The European Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 10(5), 597–610. Retrieved from
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17405629.2012.726469
Yildiz, I. B., von Kriegstein, K., & Kiebel, S. J. (2013). From birdsong to human speech
recognition: bayesian inference on a hierarchy of nonlinear dynamical systems. PLoS
Computational Biology, 9(9), e1003219. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003219
Yoshida, W., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2008). Game theory of mind. PLoS Computational
Biology, 4(12), e1000254. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000254
Young, G. S., Merin, N., Rogers, S. J., & Ozonoff, S. (2009). Gaze behavior and affect at 6
months: Predicting clinical outcomes and language development in typically developing
infants and infants at risk for autism. Developmental Science, 12(5), 798–814.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00833.x
Zadbood, A., Chen, J., Leong, Y. C., Norman, K. A., & Hasson, U. (2017). How We Transmit
Memories to Other Brains: Constructing Shared Neural Representations Via
Communication. Cerebral Cortex , 27(10), 4988–5000.
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhx202
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Zhong, X., Deng, S., Ma, W., Yang, Y., Lu, D., Cheng, N., … Li, Z. (2017). Anterior cingulate
cortex involved in social food-foraging decision-making strategies of rats.
Brain and Behavior, 7(10), e00768. http://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.768
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Summary of key features circumscribing cooperative communication. Certain features,
e.g., alignment with a communicative system, are discussed in Section 4. This paper associates
these phenomena with the corresponding scale of dynamics underwritten by the free-energy
formulation and, more substantively, the hierarchically mechanistic mind (see Fig. 4 in Badcock,
Friston, & Ramstead, 2019).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Figure 2.
Fig. 2. Active inference. This Figure schematizes active inference. It depicts the coupling of
an agent’s internal states (the dynamics of which entail predictions or beliefs about the niche, μ)
to its external states (the dynamics of the agent’s niche, η). Middle Panel: The influence of the
niche on the agent is given by the dynamics of the agent’s sensations, s. Reciprocally, the influence
of the agent upon its niche is given by the agent’s action, a , upon the niche. This means that the
niche is not directly observable from the perspective of an agent’s internal states; and the agent’s
internal states are not directly observable from the perspective of the niche. From an agent’s
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
perspective, the niche is thus described as a set of hidden variables. Hidden variables must be
inferred (i.e., predicted) from sensory observations. Thus, to minimize the probability of sampling
surprising sensory states, the task for the agent is to attune the dynamics of internal states to those
of the niche; or attune the dynamics of the niche to those of internal states. Attunement renders the
agent an approximate (predictive) model of the hidden causes of its sensations. We can quantify
the degree of attunement between organism and niche with a quantity called variational free energy
(Bruineberg et al., 2018; Constant et al., 2018). Free energy F bounds (i.e., is greater or equal to)
the surprisal –ln p(s) associated with a sensation (Friston, 2010). Importantly, free energy is a
function of two quantities to which the organism has access, namely, its sensations and predictions
(for discussion, see Bruineberg et al., 2018). Lower Panel: The bottom right details how perception
optimizes free energy by implicitly minimizing a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term D. The
KL divergence tracks the statistical similarity of two distributions (Cover and Thomas, 1991); e.g.,
the similarity of prior beliefs about the state of the niche with posterior beliefs (Friston, 2012).
Because the KL divergence provides an upper bound on surprisal, minimizing it renders the agent
a model of the niche and thus implicitly bounds the surprise of sensory states. Upper panel: These
expressions define the relationship of the niche to the agent. Note the kind of ‘mirror image’
relationship between the equations in the upper panel with the equations in the lower. This
relationship is a consequence of the mathematics of free energy minimization (see Bruineberg,
Rietveld, et al., 2018; Constant et al., 2018). It means that the niche ‘sees’ and ‘learns’ about the
agent (i.e., via the agent’s action) in the same way an agent sees and learns about their niche (i.e.,
via the niche’s ‘action’). This insight is extended in Fig 3. Adapted with permission from Veissière
et al. (2019).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Figure 3.
Fig. 3. Thinking through other minds. This Figure depicts a set of heuristic equations that describe
the kind of free energy minimization hypothesized to underwrite the acquisition and production of
learned cultural behaviors via the coupled dynamics sketched in the main text (full equations in
Figure 2). In the context of human communication, coupled dynamics are energized by an adaptive
prior for alignment. The adaptive prior for alignment specifies the characteristically enhanced
precision of the hypothesis that ‘we’ exist. This prior motivates similar agents to actively couple
their respective actions a and sensations s . Via the processes discussed in the main text, this
n n
statistical coupling of sensation and action enables each individual to reliably to align with (i.e., to
infer) the hidden states µ of conspecific n. This circular process brings about a process of cultural
n
niche construction that creates, maintains, and modifies a set of predictable epistemic (i.e., deontic)
resources, h. These specify a set of high value (i.e., predictable) observation-policy mappings,
which are used to disambiguate the mental states of conspecifics (Veissière et al., 2019). One
important class of deontic resource is the set of observation-policy mappings that underwrite a
system of communicative constructions (i.e., form-meaning pairings). This means that the use of
communicative constructions plays a critical role in enabling agents with an adaptive prior for
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
alignment to effectively disambiguate external states. This is because an agent’s external states are
constituted, in part, by the internal, mental states of another agent (and vice versa). This follows
form the fact that external states cause sensation; for an agent equipped with an adaptive prior for
alignment, inferring the motion of external states entails inferring other agents’ hidden states. The
production and observation of communicative constructions is useful because it effectively and
flexibly guides ‘regimes’ of attention that enable species’ unique forms of cultural learning (see
Ramstead, Veissière, & Kirmayer, 2016; Veissière et al., 2019). Diachronically, communicative
constructions are finessed by a community of agents via the inheritance and (intended or
unintended) modification of constructions during either learning or usage. Adapted with
permission from Veissière et al. (2019).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Figure 4.
Fig. 4. One canonical ‘loop’ of the coupled action-perception cycle. This example is ‘canonical’
in the sense that the manifestation of the coupled action-perception cycle in a given instance may
vary as a function of context and the experience of its constituent members (e.g., an infant’s
communicative needs with an adult are different than a pair of adults’). With this in mind, for two
agents A and B expecting to reliably infer each other’s mental states, the beliefs of A (‘my idea’)
generate A’s observable actions (‘my behavior’). The actions of A, in turn, cause the (attended)
sensory states of B. Attention directed towards agent A by agent B in turn enables the observations
generated by A to entrain the hidden states of B (‘your version of my idea’). This is just some
hypothesis entertained by B about the causes of B’s observations (i.e., about the mental states
generating A’s actions). To increase or maintain the reliability of B’s hypothesis, B must then act
on the niche (‘your behavior’) to test B’s hypothesis about hidden causes, as it were (that is, to
check for mutual understanding, for instance; e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). B thereby causes
A’s attended observations and, hence, A’s mental states (‘my version of your idea’). This looping
dynamics continues until both agents infer alignment (Friston & Frith, 2015a). Central here is that
A is attending to the sensory states generated by B (and vice versa) because the only way to gather
evidence for the adaptive prior that mental states are aligned is to attend to the sensory effects of
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
one’s actions; and evidence for hypotheses about the sensory effects of one’s actions can only be
given (in the present context) by the actions of the other agent. Working backwards, because the
actions of another agent are generated by their mental states; and their mental states are entrained
by (attended) sensory observations; and their sensory observations are generated by one’s own
actions; we thus arrive at the claim, given at the start of this section, that “A central part of the
content of the prior belief prescribing the alignment of mental states among conspecifics is that
the actions of agents (e.g., oneself) modulate the mental states (prior beliefs) of other agents.”
Adapted with permission from Friston & Frith (2015a).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Figure 5.
Fig. 5. A simulation of free-energy minimization of the sort implied by the coupled action-
perception cycle. Two birds – endowed with prior expectations about the hidden states generating
a shared (birdsong) narrative – sing for 2 s and then listen for a response. The posterior expectations
for the first bird are shown in red; and the equivalent expectations for the second bird are shown
in blue (both as a function of time). The left panel shows chaotic and uncoupled dynamics when
the birds cannot hear each other (‘singing alone’), while the right panel shows the synchrony in
hidden states that emerges when the birds exchange sensory signals (‘singing together’). The
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
different colors correspond to the three hidden states for each bird. When singing alone, the birds
cannot hear each other (because they are too far apart). Consequently, the dynamics diverge due
to the sensitivity to initial conditions implicit in their (chaotic) generative models. The sonogram
heard by the first bird is given in the upper panel. Because this bird can only hear itself, the
sonogram reflects the predictions about action based upon its (first- and second-level) posterior
expectations. Compare this to the case when the two birds can hear each other (‘singing together’).
Here, the posterior expectations encoded by internal states show (identical) synchrony at both the
sensory and extrasensory levels, as shown in the middle panels (e.g., Pérez, Carreiras, &
Duñabeitia, 2017). Note that the sonogram is now continuous over the successive 2 s epochs,
because the first bird can hear itself and the second bird. The ensuing synchronization manifold
(i.e., the part of the joint state space that contains the generalized synchronization) is shown in the
lower panels. These plot the second-level expectations in the second bird against the equivalent
expectations in the first. The synchronization manifold for identical synchronization corresponds
to the (broken) diagonal line. For details, see Friston & Frith (2015a). Obtained and adapted with
permission from Friston & Frith (2015a).
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Figure 6.
Submitted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-copyedit). Frontiers in Psychology – Cultural
Psychology. Special Issue: Imagining Culture Science: New Directions and Provocations. Please
do not cite this version.
Fig. 6. A duet for one. This Figure depicts learning and communication via repeated engagement
in coupled action-perception cycles in the context of an adaptive prior to align with conspecifics’
hidden states. (a) Shows changes in the posterior expectations of an order parameter of the first
bird (blue) and second bird (green) determining the chaotic structure of the songs depicted in
Figure 5 (by number of reciprocal sensory exchanges). The shaded areas correspond to 90% (prior
Bayesian) confidence intervals. The broken lines (and intervals) report the results of the same
simulation, but when the birds could not hear each other. (b) Shows the synchronization of
posterior expectations encoded by extrasensory areas for the first (i) and subsequent (ii) exchanges,
respectively. This synchronization is shown by plotting a mixture of expectations and their
temporal derivatives from the second bird against the equivalent expectations of the first bird. This
mixture is optimized by assuming a linear mapping between the birds’ hidden states. In this
example, the second (green) bird had more precise beliefs about its order parameter and, therefore,
effectively, ‘taught’ the first bird. Parameter estimation (learning) converges towards the same
value resulting in (generalized) synchrony between the two birds. For details, see Friston & Frith
(2015b). Adapted with permission from Friston & Frith (2015b).