“Homo informatio”
Did very “small-world” networks enhance the Darwinian fitness of primaeval Homo through exchanges of
information that enabled exploration of resources beyond those exploitable at hand? An active inference suggestion is
offered about the early evolution of human social behaviour.
Author
Corresponding author: Michael J. Walker
Honorific professor emeritus, University of Murcia, Faculty of Biology
Orcid: 0000-0003-4359-7436
Email addresses: walker@um.es; mjwalke@gmail.com
Declarations: The author declares: that he is the sole author; that he has not used generative AI in preparing the MS;
that the MS is not under consideration by any other journal; that there is no conflict of interest; that he has funded the
work himself in its entirety; that the work has neither involved data bases nor research on people, children, or animals.
Contents
Keywords; Highlights-Short Abstract; Long Abstract; Text including 3 boxes; Acknowledgements; References; Table 1
Keywords
homininan; small-world networks; mixed-sex philopatry; information; zone of bounded surprisal (ZBS); evolution
Highlights/Short Abstract
1. A broader cognitive “zone of bounded surprisal” (ZBS) emerged during Late Miocene times in small social units of
mosaic-landscape dwelling homininans than in woodland-dwelling paninans.
2. “Small-world” homininan networks of very small, mixed-sex philopatric, social units, with maternal and paternal
close proximity to children, facilitated the augmentation of intra- and inter-unit information.
3. Pliocene and Pleistocene spatiotemporal spread of homininans involved increases of transmissible information that
expanded tool-making, resource-exploitation, and communicative fluency.
4. Biological and natural processes are indicated which could have been advantageous or disadvantageous to the survival
of various homininan taxa identified in the Pliocene and Pleistocene fossil record.
Long Abstract
A phylogenetic split ~7.5 Ma (million years ago) separated paninan ancestors that were unlike today's chimpanzees, and
homininan ancestors that were unlike Homo sapiens today; neither had evolved into their modern physical and
behavioural forms. Those paninans later became mainly frugivorous woodland-dwelling Pan whose
multifemale-multimale troops have social hierarchies where prominent parts are played by promiscuous males
whose female offspring have little choice after menarche but to seek sexual partners in other troops, hostility
between troops notwithstanding, whilst male promiscuity is incompatible with paternal interest in their
offspring, interest being provided mainly by mothers or female alloparents.
Contrary to widespread conjecture that the aforementioned social arrangement was that of primaeval homininans, it is
proposed here that by 4 Ma the nature of the mosaic landscapes (of grasslands and stands of trees) that were the
habitat of australopithecine homininans, had 4 consequences that impinged on homininan evolution,
differentiating it from that of woodland-dwelling paninans:
(1) The diversity of whatever was available to eat was not the same in adjoining habitats each of which may have been
constrained by whatever mostly could be foraged, scavenged, eaten, or carried away, within perhaps a 2-hour
walk;
(2) Whatever was forageable, scavengeable, and edible within that distance likely was limited at any period of the year,
so social units were increasingly omnivorous and necessarily small;
(3) Smallness demanded cognitive ingenuity and transmissibility of existential information acquired by active inference
generated by self-evidencing through enacted neuroethological behavioural responses, in line with the free
energy principle, thanks to the cognitive broadening of homininan “zones of bounded surprisal” (ZBS) with
respect to paninans' ZBS, both within each homininan “small-world” social unit and between nearby homininan
units spreading out, in space and time, as budding very small-world information networks (eventually reaching
Australia and America, propagated by H. sapiens during the Upper Pleistocene);
(4) The existential continuity of small homininan social units depended on cooperation and sporadic collaboration
between social units with mixed-sex philopatry (perhaps present ~4 Ma among Australopithecus anamensis),
behaviour which, together with (a) the generation of information within each unit that is enhanced by the
1
intimate proximity to toddlers and children of older females and males in small mixed-sex social units, and (b)
mixed-sex dispersal of sexually-active partners establishing mixed-sex social units at neolocalities nearby, was
behaviour that maintained not only heterozygosity, but also, crucial cognitive awareness of kinship links
favouring transmissibility of information and cooperation and collaboration (rather than hostility) between
neighbouring social units, and was behaviour that represented evolutionary cognitive and social divergence
from paninans.
The vulnerability of small fragile social units implies that there were hundreds of false dawns between ~4 Ma
(Australopithecus anamensis) and ~40,000 BCE when all other homininan “palaeospecies” (including Homo
neanderthalensis) had become extinct, leaving prehistoric Homo sapiens alone to roam the world, blessed with
"Homo informatio's" highly-evolved hierarchically mechanistic mind with its unequalled wide cognitive “zone
of bounded surprisal” (ZBS) grounded in active inference in accord with the free energy principle.
TEXT
A challenging task is that of trying to reconstruct the divergent evolution of human behaviour from that of the
chimpanzee, given that our last common ancestor lived ~7.5 million years ago and need not have behaved in identical
ways to any of its extant or extinct successors. Palaeontology and genetics have outlined the biological
(palaeobiological) trajectory of human evolution and several of its side-branches during the past four million years,
thanks to field-work and laboratory research that have firm roots in rational scientific principles. These permit scientists
to make retrodictive inferences that can be referred to working hypotheses on which to base further enquiry in the
laboratory or in the field. Biologists are scientists who view the evolution of complex systems through the Darwinian
prism of natural selection underpinning biological adaptation, including (a) evolutionary developmental (evo-devo)
aspects, (b) ecological (environmental) aspects, and (c) ethological (behavioural) aspects. Such scrutiny has gained a
rightful place in palaeobiology and palaeoanthropology. The latter, however, is faced with a singular biological problem,
namely, how to come to terms with the evolutionary outcome of the complex, varied, open-ended behaviour that
characterises our burgeoning yet single biological species (Homo sapiens), in a manner that keeps the evolutionary
process compatible with natural selection of species, the three aspects of biological adaptation mentioned above, and
the vast time-span since the last ancestor in common with the chimpanzee. A possible solution, developed here, invokes
the concept of a neurobiological, cerebral, “zone of bounded surprisal”, relating to the amplitude of cognitive awareness
and its flexibility, which is based on the formulation of “active inference” in terms of the “free energy principle”.
Considerations of genetics and natural selection of species by adaptation imply imperceptibly gradual change. It is
proposed that the evolutionary trajectory, of which we are the outcome, initially was made up of very small-world social
units that fostered the transmissibility and transmission of information between members and with neighbouring units,
leading eventually to major evolutionary changes that came to characterise human biology and human behaviour. As
with alternative proposals that interpret the changes from an actualist standpoint, based on comparison or contrast with
contemporary ape behaviour, the proposal lacks empirical Pliocene instantiation, while offering a scientifically plausible
rationale.
1. Introductory Background
The earliest known fossils of our human genus Homo come from East Africa and are nearly three million years
old (~2.8 Ma; shortly before the transition ~2.58 Ma from the Pliocene epoch to the Pleistocene). Homo became the sole
surviving hominin genus after ~1.3 Ma of those habitually-bipedal Hominini which included Australopithecus,
Kenyanthropus, and Paranthropus. Palaeoenvironmental considerations suggest that the habitually-bipedal forms
exploited landscapes that were of less interest to quadrupedal hominins, given the dearth of fossil ancestors of
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and bonobos (Pan paniscus) - two quadrupedal African hominin species that genetics
implies had separated by ~2.0 Ma, though no Pan fossils are known before ~0.6 Ma. By contrast, fossil gelada baboons
(Theropithecus) are present in some sediments containing bipedal hominin fossils [1] [2] cf.[3]. Genetic comparison
implies that the last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees lived ~7.5 Ma in the Late Miocene cf.[4]. The
Hominini and Gorillini are taxonomical tribes of the hominine subfamily Homininae that, alongside the Ponginae
(orangutans), composes the great-ape hominid family Hominidae [5] that along with the Hylobatidae (“lesser apes”,
gibbons) makes up the hominoid superfamily of Hominoidea of tail-less Primates, whereas monkeys, including geladas,
mostly have visible tails.
In East Africa during the Early Pliocene, the perhaps sporadically bipedal Ardipithecus ramidus persisted ~4.2-
4.1 Ma when it may have been a neighbour of the early, habitually-bipedal Australopithecus anamensis, co-existing in
a mixed landscape of grassland and woodland that could allow the perpetuation of arboreality alongside the exploitation
2
of open country. Previously, the ~5.5 Ma Ardipithecus kadabba dwelt in a more wooded environment, as probably did
the somewhat earlier fossil hominines, Orrorin tugenensis and Sahelanthropus tchadensis, and the even earlier (9.9-9.8
Ma) hominid Nakalipithecus nakayamai that perhaps was among the ancestors of Chororapithecus abyssinicus (~8.5-7
Ma) that may have been a fossil precursor of modern Gorillini whose troops of between 5 and 30 members exploit
humid woodland. Australopithecus was a widespread genus, present ~3.5 Ma not only in East Africa, but also beside
the Central African Lake Chad (today ~300 m a.s.l.), and even on the South African Highveld karst (today ~1,400 m
a.s.l.) which it shared with Paranthropus, and, much later on, Homo ~1.8 Ma. Skeletal remains of the obligate biped
Homo come from Transcaucasia ~1.8 Ma, though sites with stone artefacts or evidence of anthropic activity in North
Africa, the Near East, Europe, Russia, and China have dates ≥2 Ma [6] [7] [8] [9], implying early widespread homininan
dispersals across diverse landscapes. Adaptive behavioural responses by habitually-bipedal hominins, but which are
uncharacteristic in Pan, seem to have been present ~3.4-3.3 Ma when stone-flaking and cut-marked bone offer East
African evidence from half-a-million years before there are skeletal remains assignable to Homo; maybe stone-flaking
was done by penecontemporaneous Kenyanthropus platyops, possibly a close antecedent of Homo, but Australopithecus
and Paranthropus were likely capable also.
From the contrastive behavioural and ethological standpoints of dynamical evolution, a two-way division of the
Hominini tribe into subtribes of Paninina (paninans; Pan) and Hominina (homininans: Australopithecus,
Kenyanthropus, Paranthropus, Homo) is convenient. A three-way division is preferred by some palaeoanthropologists
who reserve the subtribe Hominina exclusively for Homo and assign other extinct habitually-bipedal genera to an
australopithecinan subtribe (Australopithecina) [10] [11] [12]. The anatomical rationale for a tripartite arrangement
could well be appropriate for an australopithecinan clade with characteristic behaviour in which bipedalism went hand-
in-hand, or hand-and-foot, with climbing up trees, or on to narrow edges of steep rock outcrops or cliffs, for nesting,
resting, and observing predators at a possibly safe distance. Given the likelihood that such activities were among
behaviours achievable by Homo 3 million years ago, the two-way paninan-homininan distinction seems appropriate,
and henceforth homininan is used to embrace australopithecines and Early Pleistocene Homo. Despite a widely-held
view that African homininans likely were frequent victims of predatory creatures [13] [14], only very few African
excavated sites that were feeding places or lairs of large carnivores provide indisputable taphonomical evidence of
osteological damage inflicted by them on Plio-Pleistocene homininans (e.g.[15] [16] [17]). Moreover, osteological
damage sometimes could be an outcome of the removal by a scavenging carnivore of a fresh corpse (not necessarily one
that it had killed), in order to eat it, or share it with offspring, somewhere unattractive to competing scavengers.
Early analyses of trace-elements and stable radiogenic isotopes in bones and teeth from the Swartkrans
palaeocave site, in South Africa, implied both that predators had devoured robust australopithecines and Homo erectus-
ergaster there, and also that those homininans had fed on a range of plants and, plausibly, small vertebrate and
invertebrate prey [18]. Subsequent analytical research has shown that Australopithecus and Paranthropus homininans
sampled in southern Africa had a dietary range, including not only components derived from the C photosynthetic
3
pathway but also some from the C pathway, which was wider than that of other Plio-Pleistocene Primates there, and
4
reflected “a broad ecological niche” [19] (though carnivores seem to have eaten some of them), and that perhaps there
was female dispersal [20] [21]. Because the C pathway is widespread in dry landscapes (e.g., savannah grassland),
4
eating plants in them (e.g., sedges and their edible tubers or rhizomes; tropical grasses) or parts of animals that feed on
those, indicates aspects of the environment, and may point to the eater’s rank in the trophic food chain of an ecosystem.
It is important, nevertheless, to remember that in the Kenyan Turkana basin the earliest homininan, Australopitheus
anamensis (4.3-3.8 Ma), mainly ate C foodstuff [22] like the non-homininan hominines. Isotopic research in the
3
Ethiopian Lower Omo River basin shows that after 2.4 Ma there was an increase both in the intake of C plants by
4
grazing animals and in the intake by homininans of such plants or of food derived from such animals [23]. In the
Ethiopian Awash River basin there existed four palaeontologically-distinct homininan taxa between 2.8 and 2.5 Ma [24].
Continent-wide climatic changes, palaeoecological variability between and within regions, and differences in feeding
proclivities between or within homininan taxa, all complicate attempts to identify when, where, and which homininan
species rose to the rank of frequent eaters of food extracted from animals that graze on C vegetation, and whether access
4
was gained by homininan scavengers or hunters. The matter is of interest not only from the broad viewpoint of human
evolution within the Homininae, but also with regard to the evolution in the Hominina of the brain, cognition, and use
of information. Given the dental, maxillo-facial, and general skeletal features that separate the taxa Australopithecus,
Paranthropus and Homo from one another, and the presence of the three taxa in broadly similar African landscapes at
the onset of the Pleistocene (2.58 Ma), a plausible conjecture is that their respective patterns of routine behaviour were
not precisely identical to one another, much less were they identical to those of any extant Homininae. Another plausible
conjecture is that natural selection of adaptations affecting behaviour took place successively, through gradual genetic
neurobiological modification, in three long spans of geological time. The first was from ~7.5 Ma to the appearance in
3
the fossil record of Australopithecus anamensis ~4 Ma, when the second time-span began which embraced the
appearance successively of Paranthropus and Homo, and lasted until ~2.3 Ma cf.[25].
The third time-span saw the disappearance of Australopithecus and Paranthropus and the dispersal of Homo
into Eurasia, and by ~0.77 Ma (the onset of the Middle Pleistocene) the behaviour of Homo had little in common with
the routine behaviour of contemporaneous taxa of Homininae. The first time-span lacks tangible finds of behaviour that
can be attributed unambiguously to Australopithecus or any other homininan. From the second, cut-marks on bone [26],
flaked stones, [27] [28] [29], and transport of stone [30] indicate homininan activities that are not undertaken routinely
by extant wild Hominidae. Stone core-and-flake assemblages, uncharacteristic of behaviour by modern great apes,
represent the earliest Palaeolithic technology which often is designated Oldowan (after sites at the Olduvai Gorge).
Whilst Australopithecus might have performed core-and-flake activities in various parts of Africa, in East Africa
Paranthropus and Homo are especially plausible protagonists [31]. Flaked stones from Gona (Ethiopia), ~2.6 Ma, imply
the existence of manipulative skills that were intermediate between those of trained chimpanzees or bonobos and human
trainers [32]. At the onset of the third time-span, stone was being knapped at the 2.34 Ma site of Lokalalei 2C (West
Turkana, Kenya) with an accuracy and precision [33] [34] rarely reached, if ever, by extant paninans trained by stone
knappers.
Thereafter, the Palaeolithic record provides noteworthy evidence of undoubtedly homininan behaviour. This is
manifested not only by different repeated forms of artefacts such as hand-axes, cleavers, retouched regular flakes, and
spheroids, which are made by incompatibly unique sequences of the manual reduction of stone or bone cf.[35] [36], but
also by attention to fire and perhaps the roasting food, long before evidence of pyrotechnology is present in the
Palaeolithic record, cf.[37] [38] [39] [40], and by geographical dispersal into Eurasia [6] [7] [8] [9], though some of the
behaviour could have been that of not only Homo but sometimes also Australopithecus or Paranthropus in Africa.
Sections 2 and 3 provide the basis of the conjectural argument from the standpoint of neurobiological cognitive evolution
(of “zones of bounded surprisal” in line with active inference according to the free energy principle, see Section 2), but
it is enough here to state that the three spans of time correspond to, first, the bio-behavioural and genetic seeds of
propensities that, secondly, initiated the widening of explorative behaviour and epistemic awareness of alternative
possibilities for taking appropriate actions, which, thirdly, enabled their successful various and varied undertaking (e.g.,
hunting, trapping) without impairing reproductive success (a.k.a., adaptive fitness, Darwinian fitness). A matter of
surmise concerns just what factors impaired the reproductive success of Australopithecus and Paranthropus, hindering
their survivability, and leading them to extinction.
Much has been written about human or Primate victims of predatory carnivores and the possible implications
for the survivability of Plio-Pleistocene homininans. Palaeontological considerations [41] [42] [43] indicate that the East
African carnivoran guild underwent a decline after the appearance of Homo erectus (ergaster), who could have
contributed to it, perhaps more by scavenging than by hunting. Before that time, Plio-Pleistocene homininan behaviour
could have involved sporadic stealing of food from carnivores’ feeding places, but its likely infrequency, on account of
confrontational risks during such scavenging, might favour a consideration of homininans as primary predators [44 p.
365]. It is doubtful that homininan organisation in Pliocene landscapes resembled that of today’s woodland chimpanzees
or bonobos, “because the risk of conspicuousness and the added costs of vigilance in large, competitive parties would
have been prohibitive in the carnivore rich terrestrial habits (sicut) under consideration… (This) conjecture leaves open
the possibility that hominins formed quiet, cohesive groups with less distracting competition” [44 p. 369] “…shaped
strongly by inter-individual proximity and social relationships. Therefore, safety may depend on establishing familiarity,
trust, and reciprocity with a few individuals who will warn others when a predator is detected” [44 p. 369]. According
to that reasonable interpretation, the smallness of the social units enhances the transmission of information. Narrow
edges or shelves on steep rock outcrops or cliffs, and dispersed, small stands of trees for nesting, could have
accommodated very small homininan social units only, though such places that were within easy walking distance of
each other could have enabled social units to exchange kin, cooperate, and collaborate sporadically in joint activities
that may have involved two, three, or sometimes even four social units, coming together from time to time.
Undeniably, the absence of dense arboreality and the world-wide presence in diverse natural surroundings render
unique the adaptive zone of contemporary Homo. Nonetheless, within both Australopithecus and Paranthropus the
anatomical descriptions of morphologically-distinctive fossil “palaeospecies” hardly imply that these became, so to
speak, dead-end “twigs” on an evolving homininan figurative “bush”. Plausibly, this uncommon diversity of
osteologically-discrete forms within the hominine fossil record reflects a common homininan evolutionary tendency
towards the development of neurobiological mechanisms that enabled and enhanced the homininan exploration and
exploitation of a diversity of environments unattainable by paninans. An inverse temporal relation may exist between
the decline of the African large-carnivore guild and the expansion of homininan brains, which perhaps reflects growing
4
homininan impingement on ecosystems [45] and, quite possibly, the growth of the homininan population, together
perhaps with its existential behaviour conditioned by increasingly seasonal environmental fluctuation, such that, after
~1.75 Ma large carnivores no longer enjoyed their previously unrestricted access to ungulate prey [46] [47].
A plausible conjecture is that some homininan very small-world social units were capable of collaborating in
joint enterprises, such that their epistemic “lore”, or neurobiological cognitive awareness about their environments,
enhanced the exploitation of these and, in consequence, enhanced reproductive success. The palaeoanthropological
record indicates that, in this regard, the genus Homo was more successful than Australopithecus first, and, finally,
Paranthropus with which it coexisted until ~1.5 Ma. A widespread inference from the Early Pleistocene Palaeolithic
record is the implication of Homo with the evolution of technical aptitudes from ~1.75 Ma and with the demographical
spread ~2 Ma into Eurasia, both of which suggest that the adaptive fitness and reproductive success of Homo outstripped
those of Paranthropus. However, not even in the Early Pleistocene can stochasticity and ergodicity be overlooked when
considering Palaeolithic behaviour [48], as British archaeologists have long been aware cf.[49 esp. p. 262] [50 esp. p.
28] [51 esp. p. 186].
It is proposed here that the failure of several homininan taxa to attain and maintain the reproductive success
necessary to avert their extrinction cannot be attributed mainly to ecologically-driven differentiation, because the
identification of different taxa in Pliocene and Early Pleistocene sedimentary contexts which often were similar implies
that their natural surroundings were more or less commensurate. This situation likely continued even when the
environments were undergoing geologically-speaking quite rapid environmental evolution of ecotones and the
corresponding biotopes. Put in technical jargon, the undoubted skeletal differences between penecontemporaneous
homininan taxa cannot easily be explained away by a conjecture that they were biologically-specific outcomes of
different morphological or physiological adaptations to their supposedly respective evolving adaptive zones that were
supposedly specifically-unique fitness landscapes. It is likely that often there existed overlapping ecological
characteristics of several adjacent territories exploited by anatomically-defined homininan taxa whose diverse
morphological aspects owed to inherited differences that only with imaginative hindsight might be conjectured, perhaps,
as being inevitably predictable outcomes of the differential natural selection of morphological modifications to
supposedly different, albeit unidentifiable, environmental components. The argument to be developed here is that
gradually-evolving behavioural differences between homininan taxa underlay long-term differences in their
survivability and evolvability.
Notwithstanding their diagnostic osteological differences, some Plio-Pleistocene homininan taxa seem to have
been penecontemporaneous and able to exist in quite similar surroundings, which suggests they shared at least some
behavioural abilities that differed markedly from modern paninan behaviour. Granted the foregoing, a not unreasonable
surmise is that heritable bio-behavioural Baldwin effects (e.g., transmission of learnt or acquired responses to novel
EDITORS, PLEASE NOTE THAT THE NUMBERING OF BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES IN THIS AND
OTHER BOXES FOLLOWS CONSECUTIVELY FROM THE TEXT THAT IMMEDIATELY PRECEDES EACH
BOX IN THIS MANUSCRIPT, AND IT IS REQUESTED THERFORE THAT EACH BOX BE PLACED IN THE
PUBLISHED VERSION WITHIN THE TEXT IN A MANNER THAT MAINTAINS THE SEQUENTIAL
NUMBERING OF THE REFERENCES.
*Baldwin effect: an evolutionary process where a behaviour, learnt by experience and developmental plasticity,
becomes genetically hardwired and instinctive over generations by natural selection, such that those creatures
that are better than others at learning and adapting to new traits and environments have a greater chance of
reproducing and their offspring inherit the underlying genetic predisposition for the learnt behaviours, that may
become innate. Developmental plasticity is thought to speed up the biological evolution of traits that favour
reproductive success (adaptive, Darwinian fitness). The concept was foreshadowed by Charles Darwin’s
acquaintance the biologist Douglas Alexander Spalding [52] cf.[53], and twenty years later on was it developed
and promulgated by the psychologist James Mark Baldwin [54]. A computational demonstration of the
plausibility of the Baldwin effect [55] was at first well received cf.[56], but latterly methodological shortcomings
have been detected [57]. A recent simulation study [58] indicates that the mechanism of plasticity with regard
to behavioural acquisition or learning is a significant determinant of heritable Baldwin effect outcomes.
information involved in niche-construction [59] [60] cf.[61] [62], or other numerical aspects (e.g., birth spacing),
influenced differentially the evolutionary rates of selective adaptations of the population structures of different
contemporaneous or penecontemporaneous homininan taxa. Frequency-dependent variation between groups in their
rates of births and ages of reaching sexual maturity can lead to differences between successive generations which affect
5
their respective genetically-effective demographical sizes, with possibly long-term evolutionary consequences for
morphology. With regard to Late Pliocene homininan taxa, variations could have been brought about initially by way of
variable behavioural impingements that imperceptibly affected different small groups differentially according to the
extent to which learnt practices became established within some groups by their ability to consolidate information.
Plausibly, such processes influenced morphology variably, both directly through genetic inheritance of anatomical
characteristics, and indirectly throughout ontogenetic development. The relative reproductive success of homininan
“palaeospecies” likely depended on the interplay of the various influences, forming, as it were, a race between
evolvability and survivability, with unpredictable outcomes. A possibility (see below) is that a neuroethological
approach could be appropriate for interpreting the dynamical mechanisms that likely impelled homininan evolution,
ontogenetic development included, towards increasingly-complex handling of information in and between social units
that were exploring and exploiting their surroundings. The mechanisms are related to fundamental matters of general
neuroscientific interest.
During the Late Pliocene, homininans seem to have been able to explore and exploit a wide range of landscapes.
They may have preferred moist grasslands and humid woodlands in an ecological patchwork that offered a broad
diversity of bioenergetic resources, whilst also foraging on rough slopes and karst. Bioenergetic resources were limited
both by seasonal availability and competitors. Conceivably, advantage can be gained over competitors by expediting
whatever exploratory news most efficaciously enables epistemic awareness of versatile exploitative strategies. Here, it
is advantageous to maintain an open-ended attitude towards envisaging pragmatic, agile, alternative possible tactics in
addition to customary ones. Expeditious use of novel information is possible when there is continual social intercourse
within and between very small, agile, neighbourly units that are related by kin. By contrast, appreciation is hampered if
new information is diluted when filtered through a bustling pack or noisy paninan troop. Such a troop may constrain the
appreciation of contributions from young members whose learning, in turn, may be constrained by a social hierarchy
preoccupied with steering a seasonal round within its territory, keeping prudent distance from other troops, and
eschewing reciprocal exchange of kin with them, albeit motivating emigration by its post-menarcheal young females as
occurs among wild chimpanzees [63] [64].
A plausible evolutionary conjecture is that, over a few million years, from the Pliocene into the Early
Pleistocene, homininan behaviour, evolved through the slowly increasing versatility of tiny, contiguous, familial social
units (e.g., Table 1), each consisting of barely a dozen members, including an alloparental individual (e.g., elder sibling,
grandparent, aunt, uncle, cousin, nephew, niece, friend, neighbour, colleague, etc.), present together at any one time,
whose reciprocal exchange of kin of both sexes produced mixed-sex philopatry. Several Primate taxa, including
Hominidae, show within-species diversity as regards not only size or territorial range, but also composition by age, sex,
and philopatry of groups or sub-groups [65], and human philopatric variability is documented for some contemporary
hunter-gatherers [66]. Behavioural flexibility likely evolved gradually in Primates (monkeys and apes especially, from
the Oligocene onwards) hand-in-glove with the evolution of the flexible processing and transmission of environmental
information. Late Pliocene homininan social units co-existed and seem to have evolved in mosaic landscapes. By
contrast, from the Late Miocene onwards, paninan behavioural ecology and ethological responses could have evolved
towards an ever-increasing social-unit size that in Pan nowadays is of ≥20 or sometimes >50 members, living mainly
in woodland suitable for regular frugivory, folivory, herbivory, insectivory, and sporadic carnivory. A not implausible
conjecture is that, between ~7.5 and ~3.5 Ma, divergence took place away from whatever demographical situation had
characterised the Miocene common ancestor of paninans and hominnans, such that paninan social unjts evolved to
become each more numerous than it – forming troops, while homininan social units evolved to become each less
numerous than it – forming very small social units. In consequence, during those four million years, specific differences
evolved in the relationships between individuals, such that heritable behaviour, and maybe even genetically-inherited
behavioural propensities, began gradually to separate homininan from paninan customary behavioural patterns. Vis-à-
vis paninans, “small-world” homininan social units could well have favoured “...motivational changes. Parents might
become more tolerant of juveniles in close proximity, and tolerant of them experimenting… Juveniles might become
more focused on adult activity” [67 p. 33]. Imperceptibly slow demographical evolutionary divergence could answer
the question [68] of what seeded the emergent evolution of human behaviour.
Hypotheses of Late Pliocene homininan emergence from Early Pliocene and Late Miocene hominin ancestors
are based often on evolutionary proposals about adaptive fitness that are drawn in a 20th-century, methodologically-
uniformitarian way ̶̶̶ i.e., assuming other things to have been equal ̶̶̶ from reasonable contemporary considerations of
adaptive biological and ethological responses to the environmental availability of those bioenergetic resources that
afforded not only least-effort sustainability but also enabled repeatability of primaeval hominine and hominin life-cycles.
Such methodological considerations have provided noteworthy lucid analyses, e.g.[69]. Research taking this
paradigmatic approach abounds in primatology, ethology, biological and physical anthropology, behavioural
6
anthropology, palaeoanthropology, palaeobiology, human palaeoecology, and prehistoric archaeology. The approach has
inspired countless publications, research papers, and unpublished dissertations. Nevertheless, often insufficient attention
is paid to geologically- or geomorphologically-related effects (e.g., in East Africa) that could require re-evaluation of
several published scenarios, because they impinge on palaeoenvironmental evolution and palaeontological sampling
[70] [71] [72] [73].
Those effects imply the possible inappropriateness or incommensurability of analogical inferences, drawn from
observations about behaviours recorded in apes, monkeys, or other creatures, whether in captivity or in the wild, that
are widely held as providing us with substantive uniformitarian principles on which to base methodological
uniformitarian interpretations about Plio-Pleistocene wild-life. Prudence cautions against trying to squeeze Holocene
ethological pegs into Plio-Pleistocene palaeoathological round holes. Such inferences may be no more than "false
analogies" and no less imprudent than are other possibly "false analogies" drawn from historical or ethnographical
accounts of hunter-gatherers’ behaviour that, by "top-down" reasoning, is inferred, analogically, as being suitable, at
least in part, for transposition on to the incommensurate and incommensurably spatiotemporal vastness of the Pliocene
and Early Pleistocene Old World without prior need for us to re-set the focus of time-perspectivism [74] [75] [76] [77]
[78], away from a focus on contemporary behaviour in discrete localities of recent human foragers or hunters, cf.[48]
[79] [80].
The matter is not trivial. From the standpoint of statistical mechanics and thermodynamics, developed during
the nineteenth century and giving rise in the twentieth to recognition that the transmission of information is based on
physical concepts which relate also to the free energy principle and active inference, theoretical physicist Carlo Rovelli
[81 p. 198] explained that “… time is not a fundamental constituent of the world, but it appears because the world is
immense, and we are small systems within the world, interacting only with macroscopic variables that average among
innumerable small, microscopic variables... We, in our everyday lives, never see a single elementary particle, or a single
quantum of space. We see stones, mountains, the faces of our friends – and each of these things we see is formed by
myriads of elementary components. We are always correlated with averages. Averages behave like averages: they
disperse heat and, intrinsically, generate time. The difficulty of grasping this idea comes from the fact that it is hard for
us to think of a world without time, and of time emerging in an approximate manner. We are too used to thinking of
reality as existing in time. We are beings who live in time: we dwell in time, and are nourished by it. We are an effect of
this temporality, produced by average values of microscopic variables. But the limitations of our intuitions should not
mislead us. Understanding the world better often entails going against intuition. If this were not the case, understanding
would be easy. Time is an effect of our overlooking of the physical microstates of things. Time is information we don’t
have.”
Ay, there’s the rub! The above quotation is preceded by “Whenever you consider a phenomenon certifying the
passage of time, it is through the production of heat that it does so. There is no preferred direction of time without heat.
But heat is our way to name averages over many variables. The idea of thermal time reverses this observation. That is
to say, instead of enquiring how time produces dissipation in heat, it asks how heat produces time. Thanks to Boltzmann,
we know that the notion of heat comes from the fact that we interact with averages. The idea of thermal time is that the
notion of time, too, comes from the fact that we interact only with averages of many variables. As long as we have a
complete description of a system, all the variables of the system are on the same footing; none of them acts as a time
variable. That is to say: none is correlated to irreversible phenomena. But as soon as we describe the system by means
of averages of many variables, we have a preferred variable that functions like common time. A time along which heat
is dissipated. The time of our everyday experience” [81 p. 198].
From the standpoint of considering evolution, “…in physics there is no clear definition of a complex system,
but there is a clear definition for a dissipative structure. And, in dissipative structures, complexity is an integral part.
This complexity in dissipative structures appears in terms of the composing network of thermodynamic forces and
flows… Emergent force flow couplings can provide novel organizational states for a dissipative structure. If these novel
processes and configurations affect the stability of the system, they can be selected for. A schematic of natural selection
can thus be inferred as a process of fluctuation-induced emergence of dynamics (i.e., mutation) leading to differential
self-maintenance dynamics (i.e., phenotypic differentiation) that are selected for by the embedding circumstances (i.e.,
adaptability). The complexification of organic life by evolution need not appeal to statistical or morphological measures
of complexity, but rather can be indexed by the network of thermodynamic force–flow couplings and the related
multiplicity of organizational states” [82 p. 115].
With regard to the complex processual relationships between biological and behavioural evolution, there are
severe limitations to the applicability of retrodictive hypotheses inferred from “average” actualist conclusions drawn
7
from contemporary ecology and ethology (e.g., about feed-back and feed-forward behavioural “loops”), and prudence
counsels against a sanguine interpretation. Climatic and environmental changes that may occur within a millennium, or
even a century, often are mostly unrecognisable before the onset of the Middle Pleistocene (~0.77 Ma) in
palaeontological, palaeoanthropological, and Palaeolithic records from before ~1 Ma, during the previous 6.5 million
years from the last common ancestor of chimpanzees and modern humans that lived ~7.5 Ma.
In order to envisage the Late Miocene and Pliocene appropriately, the focus of time-perspectivism implies giving
consideration to a plausible contrast, in open landscapes containing large predators, between, on the one hand, the
likelihood that sizeable troops (e.g., of geladas) allow reproductive continuity to succeed more often, and with greater
long-term stability, than might be the case for small groups that are easy prey, and, on the other, the long-term evolution
by natural selection of a plausibly emergent homininan propensity to incremental cognitive and behavioural versatility
by living in very small social units, whose newborn members were exposed to a wide variety of the different “small-
world” behaviours of surrounding members of both sexes and all ages (in their own and sometimes in neighbouring
kinship social units), such that from birth onwards they increasingly were able to gain discriminatory awareness about
that behavioural variety by giving it their attention and scrutiny. Both are “middle-range” (cause-effect) theories.
However, the first is based on the actualist premiss that past circumstances should be regarded as having been
commensurate with present ones until there is overwhelming substantial empirical evidence to the contrary. The second
is more cautious, because it keeps in mind the underpinning of physics, that is common to past and present
circumstances. Therefore, it enjoins prudence on us before we presume that uncertainty about the past, and about those
processes that developed in it, can be brushed aside (pro tempore, at least). It fails to acknowledge that uncertainty is a
condition or circumstance during and throughout biological evolutionary processes, not just an intellectual problem that
worries some scholars more than others. The intrinsic uncertainty of models based on uniformitarian premisses is what
underlies proposals that invoke wider ranging palaeoethological theories, notwithstanding the gaps that uncertainty may
never let us bridge.
From the aforementioned considerations, plausibility can be assigned to the notion put forward here that, by
natural selection, an emergent homininan propensity towards human behaviour enabled a gradual expansion of the
phylogenetic hominan “zones of bounded surprisal” (ZBS) [80], by active inference in accord with the free energy
principle (see below and Section 2). Because this first-principles interpretation implies an ultimate explanation in line
with natural selection in the origin of species, it offers an advantage, and perhaps a theoretical advance, over proximate
explanations such as regarding different phylogenetic social behaviours of Simiiform Primates as somehow being
consequent on how their various species' respective mean differences of cerebral mass may be correlated, other things
being equal, with their mean social-group sizes or perhaps with their fecundity. Instead, the interpretation proposed here
is that the evolution of social behaviour took divergent evolutionary paths in paninans and homininans after their last
common ancestor of the Late Miocene. In the homininan evolutionary trajectory there developed genetically- and
epigenetically-established adaptive evo-devo mechanisms involving neuroethology and ontogeny. A significant outcome
of the neurobiological ontogenetic evolutionary divergence is the phylogenetic differentiation of zones of bounded
surprisal (ZBS) that today separates humans from chimpanzees and bonobos.
But what if some things had not been equal? What if something lacking in the transposition of substantive
uniformitarian conclusions to a methodologically-uniformitarian principle could be an additional consideration of the
likelihood of differential diachronic (time-wise) evolvability of those biological and ethological responses which need
not have developed at one and the same, constant, invariant rate in each and every hominine and hominin taxon between
~7.5 and ~1 Ma?
Against the notion that the size of Pliocene homininan social units could have been similar to that of paninan
troops today, it should be pointed out that much evidence adduced to support it is open to question. Claims that the
increments in homininan skull volumes overall, from the Late Pliocene to the Late Pleistocene, are per se reliable
indicators of increasing sizes of individual prehistoric social groups (let alone, of their allegedly “cumulative cultural”
complexity) fail to take due account of time-perspectivism. The claims put the cart before the horse by presuming that
for which scientific enquiry ought first to have provided substantive evidence that can withstand sceptical rebuttal.
Palaeontological evidence is lacking that might lend support to a surmise that during the Late Miocene the last common
ancestor of the paninans and homininans lived in social units with numbers of members similar to those of today's
chimpanzee troops. It is a postdictive or retrodictive surmise, also, that the size of Plio-Pleistocene homininan social
units was similar to that of today's (Late Holocene) bands of hunter-gatherer kin-related social units. A house of cards
can be built up by the ill-advised application of an allegedly biologically-based substantive uniformitarian account of
present-day reality by transforming it into a methodologically uniformitarian programme for Late Caenozoic ancestors
of paninans and homininans. This ignores not only the immense ecological changes that were transforming Africa
8
throughout the Late Miocene and Pliocene, and to which the various descendants of the last common ancestor had to
adapt (and which unquestionably evolved, otherwise there would be neither chimpanzees nor humans alive today), but
also the absence of incontrovertible Palaeolithic or palaeontological evidence (in contra to that for fossil Theropithecus)
that could give us a strong clue about the inferable social-unit sizes of paninans and homininans before the start of the
Late (Upper) Pleistocene (i.e., before ~0.13 Ma). On the other hand, what we do know is that, unlike paninans,
homininans before 3 Ma already were present not only in East Africa but also in South Africa and Chad, and by 2 Ma
in North Africa, the Near East, Europe, Russia and China [6] [7] [8] [9], all of which suggest some cognitive abilities of
bipedal creatures whose brains, albeit smaller than most of ours, enabled them nonetheless to move to and survive in
environments that were not only different from those of todays' chimpanzees and bonobos but also different from
those in which and to which already the earliest hominan (Australopithecus anamensis) had become adapted ~4.2 Ma.
The foregoing considerations suggest that appropriate proposals about social-unit size are in order which can be referred
to theoretical principles, such as the free energy principle and active inference, underpinning the homininan evolution
of hierarchically mechanistic minds (see below), and which can be accommodated within a minimal "bottom-up"
interpretation of such empirical paleoanthropological and Palaeolithic evidence as may be uncontroversially knowable
about homininan behaviour during the time-span under review, whilst being an interpretation in accord with
contemporary biological understanding about the extended evolutionary synthesis.
Today, the differential evolvability of two lineages descended from a last common ancestor is an unproblematic
concept from the 21st-century viewpoint where the erstwhile 20th-century modern or neo-Darwinian evolutionary
synthesis (between Mendelian allelic genetics underpinning the adaptive fitness of organisms, and allelic population
genetics underpinning the selection of species from them) has evolved into an (“evo-devo”) integrated or extended
evolutionary synthesis, in order to take into account significant contributions of epigenetics, evolutionary developmental
biology or ontogeny, niche-construction, and the dynamically-evolving interaction of all components of any
environmental niche when regarded from a not impossible theoretical standpoint (see Section 2) of quantum reference
frames borrowed from quantum field theory. A particular concept of noteworthy evolutionary relevance to behaviour
and learning in mammals, and perhaps birds, is that of hierarchically mechanistic minds [83] [84] [85] cf. [86] [87] [88].
It is based on active inference [89] [90] [91], in accord with the physical free energy principle [92] [93]. The concept is
applicable to the biological evolution, through natural selection, of the behavioural consequences of species-specific
adaptations of neurobiological predictive coding mechanisms [94] [95] [96]. Among such adaptations are zones of
bounded surprisal (ZBS) [80] for which a crude analogy is that of band-pass filters. The human ZBS is broader than that
of paninans; their remarkable cognitive abilities pale before the vast range of human open-ended thinking. In the
homininan lineage, the evolution of hierarchically mechanistic minds towards precise and accurate epistemic
appreciation of practicable exploitative outcomes is explicable from the standpoint of active inference and
neuroethological information received from and transmitted to seamless natural-cum-social environments cf.[97] [98]
[99] [100] [101] [102] [103]. It is proposed here that a matter of likely relevance is the part that was played by “small-
world” relationships in homininan evolution, especially by the transmission of information in and between evolving
neighbouring “small-world” networks, which plausibly impinged on the differential evolvability in homininan vis-à-vis
paninan phylogeny after ~7.5 Ma.
2. Information transmissibility
Regarding the efficient transmissibility of information when social unit size is very small, it is of tangential
interest that, from the standpoint of model gene-culture coevolutionary allelic considerations, which relate to W.D.
Hamilton’s rule* about the conditions under which inclusive fitness can result from kinship selection, the statistical
* W.D. Hamilton’s rule holds that an “altruistic” act is favoured if rB > C, where r = the proportional genetic
relatedness between an “altruistic” actor and its recipient (thus, a parent and child share 50% of their genes, hence
r=0.5, whereas siblings share a similar degree of relatedness; B = benefit gained by recipients in terms of
reproductive success (i.e., number of offspring); C = cost to an “altruistic” actor, estimated in terms of his or her
own reproductive success (i.e., number of offspring begotten). The rule implies that individuals likely will help a
close relative, who share genes with them, and, thus, if the indirect genetic benefits of helping a close relative
outweigh the direct costs to an individual, then his or her altruistic behaviour will become selected genetically in
that social unit, when repeated over several generations [104].
probability of contingent cooperative attitudes among individual members ̶ as against punishable uncooperative ones ̶
is greater in tiny human groups (e.g., ten people) than in bigger ones (e.g., 100 people) when both groups are subject to
equivalent rates of immigration by ethnolinguistically assimilable non-kin, though selection is perforce weak and
remains so even when the small groups are envisaged within a social landscape of neighbouring ones with whom kin
9
may be exchanged cf.[105]. However, this hardly can have been the social landscape of Pliocene or Pleistocene
homininans, let alone that of the very first of these; indeed, the likelihood of demographical sparsity renders it hard to
envisage the existence of such a social landscape before half-a-million years ago.
Moreover, behaviours, whether of cooperative adults or of uncooperative punishable adults, are not directly
commensurable with their respective emission, transmission, or receipt of information about admissible or inadmissible
behavioural responses. Those matters also depend on individual ontogenies and post-natal upbringing, throughout which
exchanges of information between developing children and members of their families or other individuals mould a
diversity of personal outcomes in the attitudes and behaviours of human adults. It is important to stress that it is precisely
the eusocial bi-parental cooperative behaviour in the provisioning and upbringing of offspring in monandrous mating
systems which distinguishes human behaviour from that of paninans. The following authoritative statement [106, p. 53]
is relevant: “Among both invertebrates and vertebrates, cooperative behaviour between unrelated individuals that are
not potential breeding partners is seldom highly developed even if they live in stable groups or colonies. Most of the
more costly forms of cooperative behaviour, such as the provisioning of young born to other individuals, are restricted
to species living in groups consisting primarily of relatives. For example, cooperative or eusocial breeding appears to
be restricted to lineages with monandrous mating systems, which generate relatively high levels of relatedness.” It also
should be borne in mind that not even the genetic underpinnings of a species’ archetypical behaviour are necessarily
immune to a Baldwin effect or its possible consequence for cooperation [107]. Perhaps one outcome of a Baldwin effect
could be the modification of the internal breeding structure of small social units. The likelihood of their extinction
notwithstanding, in a surviving lineage the evolutionary consequences could perhaps develop faster cf.[108] than they
might do through creeping allelic genetic evolution of inclusive fitness by W.D. Hamilton’s rule of kinship selection.
A not unthinkable consequence is that, together with the proposal of homininan mating in very small discrete
familial units, several of which were spatially close enough for continual interchange of members and novel information,
there was a gradually evolving cognitive trend towards a flexible awareness of alternative behavioural responses, to
which an open-ended approach taken by individuals might lead to variable choice depending on how information might
be interpreted that was burgeoning and reverberating within and between the tiny social units. Some aspects of the
matter demand particular attention, namely, the plausible composition of putative tiny social units, their likely internal,
cognitive developmental capacities over each member’s life from birth to death, and the gradual evolution of external
relationships, both with neighbours and the natural environment, envisaged with due regard to time-perspectivism. From
Australopithecus anamensis (4.3-3.8 Ma) there elapsed about three-and-a-half million years before the Palaeolithic
record (~0.5 Ma) offers evidence that transmission of different techniques or skills hints at the existence of human
“cumulative culture”. During that vast span of time there surely were thousands of false-dawns caused by network
failures, disappearances of homininan emitters and recipients of information, and reappearances in time or space of
various behavioural patterns. Furthermore, as already mentioned, the evolution of adaptive behavioural traits need not
be reflected in taxonomically-differentiable biological changes in morphology, ontogeny, physiology, or neurology, such
that particular palaeoanthropologically-designated genera or species possessed all, some, or none of the biological
adaptations most appropriate for the requisite reproductive success necessary in order for the adaptive zone of Homo to
become established as the final outcome. The natural selection of homininan adaptations, including bio-behavioural
ones, may have been more than just an inexorable goal-directed process defined by inherited allelic reproducibility (e.g.,
by Hamilton’s rule for kinship selection) that was modifiable by some heritable, circumstantially-acquired, learnt
responses (e.g., Baldwin effect). In contrast to the co-evolutionary dual-inheritance (gene-culture) interpretation, a triple
one is proposed here, because the differential diachronic (time-wise) evolvability indicated in the homininan fossil record
implies a third aspect of the evolutionary mechanism.
This aspect gives pride of place among homininans to the likelihood of increasing exchanges (in contrast to
paninans) of accurate information between individuals whose corresponding cognitive awareness increasingly made it
possible for them to envisage a variety of alternative neuroethological behavioural responses. Practising these through
trial and error led sometimes to the emergence of heritable learnt alternatives which, in turn, could result in actions
leading to outcomes that differentially affected the internal reproductive structures of different breeding aggregates.
Some outcomes were the eventual modification of an aggregate’s allelic genotypical composition. Others were
modification, perhaps sometimes less gradual, of an aggregate’s developmental ontogeny, in which a significant part
likely was played by evolutionary variations of epigenetic impingements on allelic gene-expression. Nevertheless,
neural stem-cell research on chimpanzees and humans indicates that transcriptional enhancers with human-specific
activity have affected the evolution of gene targets (conserved from the common ancestor of the two species) in human
accelerated regions (HARs) that show specific expression patterns of neural progenitor components (notably, outer
radial glial cells) in the developing cerebral cortex [109] cf.[110]. The human brain embraces a very wide range indeed
of differentially expressed genes that have cell-type specificity reflected in cellular-level epigenomic features that
10
suggest their role in the functional specialisation of individual cells [111] [112]. Laboratory research and genomic
analysis indicate that the transcriptional enhancer HAR-123, present in all therian mammals and demonstrably involved
with forebrain-hippocampal connectivity and cognitive flexibility in mice, underwent paninan-homininan evolutionary
divergence reflected in nine nucleotide differences between chimpanzees and humans out of a 442-long sequence [113],
which suggests the possibility of the evolution in homininans of a neurobiological increase in cognitive flexibility vis-
à-vis paninans during a period of time that could correspond to the Pliocene and Early Pleistocene. Granted that before
two-million years ago homininan brains were little bigger than chimpanzee brains today, an intriguing matter concerns
when the aforementioned divergence in cerebral cortical evolution might have commenced (maybe during the Pliocene),
what precipitating factors, if any, might have initiated it, and what might be an appropriate evolutionary model. A
widespread notion is that natural selection of species after the paninan-homininan divergence produced an increase in
homininan brain-size as one “palaeospecies” gave way to the next (cf., “punctuated evolutionary equilibria”). The notion
is challenged by the detection of a positive correlation between brain-size and body-mass within separate homininan
“palaeospecies”. It is a pattern that can arise when individual species undergo increasing trends separately, such that
each one shows “a positive association between relative cranial capacity and time within-species” [114]. It implies that
relative brain-size evolution in the homininan lineage “seems to be entirely explained by microevolutionary, population-
level processes” [114] albeit “with an accelerating within-species increase through time… in line with hypotheses that
evoke a coevolutionary positive feedback process such as between brain size and sociality, culture, technology, or
language” [114].
A different conclusion is that from dynamical mechanistic modelling with analysis of energy conservation
(referrable to uncontroversial biological metabolic and life-history theories) in an “evo-devo” comparison of seven
homininan “palaeospecies”, namely, that brain expansion was “not caused by direct selection for brain size but by its
genetic correlation with developmentally late preovulatory ovarian follicles. This correlation is generated over
development if individuals experience a challenging ecology and seemingly cumulative culture, among other
conditions... …the evolution of exceptionally adaptive traits may not be primarily caused by selection for them but by
developmental constraints that divert selection” [115] [117]; this corroborates the notion [118] that human brain size
could be an evolutionary “spandrel” sensu [119]. “The absence of direct selection for brain size or skill level in the
model contrasts with the longstanding view that human brain expansion was caused by direct selection for increased
cognitive ability or behavioural complexity that increases survival, as this is not the case in the model, but such selection
may be introduced in the model in the future” [117]. Whilst not implausible, it is unclear how the evo-devo “spandrel”
interpretation could account for the neocortical stem-cell research finding of genetic difference between chimpanzee
and humans, nor how their skill levels relate to (let alone correlate with) neocortical neuroplasticity. In a model in which
“skill level is defined as the capacity of an individual to overcome ecological or social challenges to extract energy from
their environment and… is measured in information units” [120], the relative contributions were estimated of
genotypical, phenotypical, ontogenetical, ecological, and social interactions, in terms of sensitivity, elasticity, and
reactivity, which offer an approach towards a dimensionless appraisal of changes that affected homininan evolution,
especially the genus Homo whose original genotypical underpinning of phenotypical characteristics played a decreasing
part, according to the model, relative to the interplay of the diversity of aspects that moulded the evolutionary trajectory
of human ontogeny, cognition, and behaviour. The conclusion from the model is in line with considerations of significant
aspects that likely gained prominence, after evolutionary divergence between paninans and homininans, in the particular
evolutionary trajectory of human cerebral ontogeny, including cooperative behaviour [121], working memory [122]
cf.[123], and extensive intracerebral white-matter myelinated neuronal bundles or “tracts” [124] [125].
Perhaps brain research will clarify the part played in the phylogenetic evolution of Hominoidea by the parallel
processing of the transmission of information, which is noteworthy in the brain of humans in contrast to macaques and
mice [126]. Plausibly, before and during the Pliocene, a very gradual enhancement of parallel processing in homininan
brains involved the imperceptible neurobiological evolution of trait-mediated indirect interactions with not only their
natural but also their social environments. The Early Pleistocene outcome was a definitive divergence of homininan
from paninan behaviour. Open to debate is whether or not cerebral parallel processing could be a “spandrel” in
homininan evolution. Also open to debate is how far, during the evolution of mammalian ontogenies, impingement of
social interaction in addition to, or in response to interaction with natural environments and their affordances, could
have affected the neuronal evolution of the noteworthy synaptic differentiation of dendritic spine sizes, each with maybe
a storage capacity of 4.1-4.69 bits of information, according to rodent hippocampal research [127] cf.[128] For Homo
sapiens brains, proposals of storage capacity range from 10 TB (terabytes) to 2.5 PB (petabytes); moreover,
notwithstanding the widely-cited 86 billion number, the number of human cerebral neurones may be between 62 and 94
billion; 61-73 billion in healthy women; 73-99 billion in healthy men [129].
11
It may be pertinent to remark that whilst the 10-20 watts (=Joules/second) which power our brain may suffice
for a memory storage of barely 4 terabytes (4TB), where 1 byte = 8 binary information digits (bits), the metabolic aspect
in relation to conservation of energy becomes complex if cerebral information were to be retained less in binary digital
form than in the form of parallel topological definitions (then maybe “All bits are off!”). Of indisputable relevance to
the phylogenetic divergence is the comparison of chimpanzee and human cerebral connectomes [125] following the
indication of the organisation of neural communities as network hubs in human brains [130] by using the analytical
methodology of graph edge-betweenness [131]. Subsequent research implies that betweenness centrality of network
hubs in human brains may well not be identical with neuroanatomical modules characterised by domain propensities,
but contributes particularly to integrating and modulating information from several hubs [132]. From an evolutionary
viewpoint, a provisional interpretation is that a phylogenetic difference between paninans and homininans has led to the
organisation of neural communities as network hubs in human brains and connecting tracts or bundles of white-matter
nerve fibres which continue to form throughout childhood and adolescence. abc
Two relevant matters of interest (cf.[116] [120] [121] [122] [133]) are that (a) the capacity of our young
children's working memory soon outstrips, after their age of four or five years, that which has been attained ever by a
mature chimpanzee, and (b) throughout long years of childhood and adolescence there continue to develop significant
tracts of white-matter bundles of neuronal fibres between different parts of our brain that enhance the facility to
remember, plan, and carry out behavioural undertakings by well-documented, contemporary, behaviourally-competent
people whose brain is much smaller than most contemporary human brains; for example, Nobel Literature laureate
Anatole France's brain (~933 cm3) was only about two-thirds of the size of most people's brains, though roughly similar
to the size of brains contained by fossil skulls of Homo between two- and one-million years ago whose forebears already
had ranged widely throughout the Old World, implying cerebral neurobiological evolution of cognitive abilities far
beyond those documented about chimpanzees or bonobos in the wild.
The behavioural versatility of chimpanzees and bonobos in the wild, and the cognitive aptitudes attained by
some when in contact with humans, have inspired actualist interpretations of primaeval homininan behaviour. Scholarly
attempts to envisage rational scenarios should not be disparaged. Their limitations, however, are obvious in as much as
the material record is sparse and ambiguous for the Late Miocene, Pliocene, and first half of the Early Pleistocene. This
hampers the development, in human evolutionary studies, of methodologically-useful archaeological and
anthropological “middle range” theory cf.[134] of the kind desired by the late-lamented archaeologist Lew Binford [135]
who distrusted post hoc ergo propter hoc accommodative argument [136, pp. 194 and 213] and argued in favour of the
testing of null hypotheses about aspects of the material archaeological record [137]. Nonetheless, such is the power of
arguments which invoke statistical analyses derived from studies, whether in the field or the laboratory, of great-ape
behaviour and cognitive ability, that many scholars accept them as providing a suitable lens through which to envisage
the behaviour of primaeval homininans. However, what is envisaged could be a mirage. From the standpoint of scientific
epistemology and methodology, such actualist retrodiction provides but a weak explanation of material phenomena
because it employs analogical inference that explains them away. This can have obstructive consequences, such as the
foreclosure of focussing (let alone funding) normative empirical scientific research directed primarily towards the
material record itself cf.[79]. Nevertheless, it goes without saying that proposals grounded on retrodictive arguments are
not necessarily incompatible with the theoretical proposal espoused here that relates the behaviour to active inference
in accord with the free energy principle. The proposal therefore is applicable to the study of behavioural evolution,
whether in bonobos, bats, or blackbirds. Its appropriateness is based on consideration of first principles in physics which
underpin neurobiological mechanisms in sentient Chordata and possibly in other animal phyla. Of particular relevance
here is the relationship between the first principles and the practical concept of information that is employed by
physicists and engineers, notwithstanding a gap as yet unclosed between consistent theory on the one hand, and its
applicability to biological evolutionary processes on the other. It is to be hoped that suggestions offered here may help
towards finding ways to close it, such that in the near future it may be possible to turn rational conjecture into plausible
assessment of the likely neurobiological, neuroethological and neuropsychological rates of change that were involved
in the late Caenozoic paninan-homininan phylogenetic divergence that has led to significant differences in the social
arrangements and social behaviours between the only surviving genera, namely, Pan and Homo.
It is suggested here that the matters can be approached appropriately by considering (a) the plausible relevance
of the concept of the evolution of mammalian brains as hierarchically mechanistic minds [83] [84] [85] as
neurobiological inference machines that work by active inference; (b) the plausibility that there have evolved taxon-
specific “zones of bounded surprisal” ZBS [80] corresponding to each particular species’ hierarchically mechanistic
mind; and (c) the possibility that a particular aspect of very early human evolution involved the transmission of
information in and between neighbouring homininan very small-world social networks, thereby initiating the differential
diachronic (time-wise) evolvability of paninan and homininan hierarchically mechanistic minds that eventually, albeit
12
extremely gradually, led to a homininan ZBS broader than that of chimpanzees and bonobos. In contrast to contemporary
humans, chimpanzees have a restricted ZBS [79] that thus limits their ability to tolerate large discrepancies between
predictions and observations (i.e., to avoid the increase of entropy whenever prediction errors are large), and in particular
it constrains their ability to copy, with accuracy and precision, actions that they have seen performed by humans. From
the viewpoint of the concept of hierarchically mechanistic minds, brains are considered to be hierarchically-organised
neurocognitive systems which interact dynamically with their surroundings, such that animals evade surprising or
unaccustomed states by their minimisation, through active inference, of variational free energy (referrable to the free
energy principle of statistical thermodynamics). The interactions involve neural predictive processing and, by
maximising marginal likelihood (cf., Bayesian model evidence), they generate perception-action responses of active
inference by actively seeking predicted sensory exchanges which can minimise cognitive surprise; such self-organisation
can be regarded as self-evidencing. The concept is rooted in the determination by Hermann von Helmholtz (1821-1894)
that the work obtainable from a closed thermodynamic system at a constant temperature can be calculated as a
thermodynamic potential. In such a “Helmholtz box”, the maximum amount of work performed by the thermodynamic
process is given by the change in Helmholtz free energy and under isothermal conditions its value is minimised when
the process reaches equilibrium and hence its final entropy is highest [138]. Helmholtz free energy is measurable as a
system’s thermodynamic potential calculated as the internal energy of a system. To complement this thermodynamic
formulation of self-organisation to thermodynamic equilibrium, in 1866 Helmholtz, who was both a physicist and a
physician, also introduced the concept of “perception as unconscious inference” based upon the notion of minimising a
“neuronal” energy [139] [140]. Variational free energy can be read as a formalisation of Helmholtz’s notion and, his
neuronal energy in terms of information theory, in line with considerations [141] [142] referrable to Feynman’s
noteworthy consideration of quantum physics [143] and Jaynes’ maximum entropy principle [144].
The information theoretic that is surprisal (a.k.a., self-information) is regarded, for practical purposes, as
equivalent to cognitive surprise (or, more simply, to prediction error in predictive-coding accounts of the Bayesian
brain). The lesser or greater tolerance of cognitive surprise corresponds, respectively, to a narrower or a broader zone of
bounded surprisal. Intolerance can be interpreted as failing to model or infer the counterfactual outcomes of observed
surprising phenomena (including unaccustomed or novel behaviour, whether generated by oneself or others), simply
because there was no (evolutionarily-endowed) generative model at hand (or in the head) to predict them (including, of
course, an animal’s own unintended accidental behaviour or slip-up: for instance, monkeys often die after falling from
trees when they have failed to grasp a high branch to which they had reached out). Plausibly, the experience of cognitive
surprise is an outcome of an evolved neurobiological propensity for exploring unorthodox possibilities of available
affordances sensu [145] [146] that are recognised in an animal’s natural or social environments. The ZBS notion contains
a temporal memory component because any cognitive surprise is in contrast with the pre-existing unsurprised state of
the sentient creature in which surprise is registered. Despite the creature being unconscious or unaware of the pre-
existing state, cognitive surprise implies a capacity for a prior state to be challenged, so to speak. The creature’s
responsiveness and any resulting neuroethological response involve comparison and contrast with its mnemonic
routines. The capacity to do that in hierarchically mechanistic minds is limited by the cerebral neurobiological
mechanisms available in different animals, including some within a single taxonomical division, such as the Hominini
(hominin) tribe and its Panina (paninan) and Hominina (homininan) subtribal branches which nowadays differ
considerably with regard to that capacity.
A few words are in order here about neuroethology, and in particular about what may underlie the receipt of
information about a creature’s surroundings (its environment) by its neurones and how they transmit information in
response and thereby initiate behaviour (hence the word neuroethology). A rational theory is that a creature’s
neuroethological responses depend on its surroundings that themselves undergo continual and continuous change. In
line with this view, sentience could derive from an (essentially topological) quantum reference frame that involves a
holographic interface (with mathematical attributes of a Markov blanket* the interior of which is conditionally
*Markov blanket (MB): “An MB is the set of states that statistically isolates (insulates) internal (systemic) from
external (non-systemic) states, such that changes in internal states are mediated by the states of the MB. The
MB itself can be partitioned into active and sensory states, which are defined by the following relations: internal
states do not influence sensory states, and external states do not influence active states. Now, we should note
that the terms ‘active’ and ‘sensory’ are potentially misleading. They are only meant to capture relations of
statistical dependence between random variables. This will be crucial to our argument..., as things that we
would not readily describe as literally acting or sensing in any meaningful sense can still be captured with this
13
formalism, since it entails only a statistical enshrouding of systemic states from external ones, and the systematic
statistical partition of the whole organism–niche system.” [88 p. 190].
independent of its exterior) on one side of which encrypted external inputs of quantum phase information from the ever-
changing environment are registerable for decoding on the other side by internal property-detectors modulated by a
mnemonically-informed, temporal comparator. In line with the scale-free space-time background of quantum
information theory, quantum reference frames are not only measurement devices but also preparation devices, where
Markov blankets provide observational contexts (by local reduction of variational free energy at the interface) for
neuronal assessments of predictability [147] [148] [149] [150] [151]. Conventional, less far-reaching, holographic
interpretations exist regarding neuronal-memory temporality which are consonant with empirical considerations [152]
[153].
A creature’s ZBS delimits its capacity to respond to unpredictable phenomena when they occur. These may be
part and parcel of widespread, naturally-evolving change in the landscape background, and also, in addition,
impingement in the foreground by other creatures (including humans), for whom these particular additional
modifications of their common surroundings can have (“cultural”) deontic value that may be communicated between
individuals. It has been suggested that, in humans, “cooperative communication” could be the result of “an evolved
adaptive prior belief that their mental states are aligned with, or similar to, those of conspecifics” prioritising behaviours
that “minimize uncertainty and optimize an individual’s internal model of the world… allowing for the development of
a shared narrative that is used to disambiguate interactants’ (hidden and inferred) mental states. Thus, by using
cooperative communication, individuals effectively attune to a hermeneutic niche composed, in part, of others’ mental
states; and, reciprocally, attune the niche to their own ends via epistemic niche construction. This means that niche
construction enables features of the niche to encode precise, reliable cues about the deontic or shared value of certain
action policies (e.g., the utility of using communicative constructions to disambiguate mental states, given expectations
about shared prior beliefs). In turn, the alignment of mental states (prior beliefs) enables the emergence of a novel,
contextualizing scale of cultural dynamics that encompasses the actions and mental states of the ensemble of interactants
and their shared environment” [103].
In neuroethological synergic contexts, the biological concepts of stigmergic behaviour and sematectonic
communication have long been recognised as helpful. We are thereby forcefully reminded that co-existence with our
surroundings is no less a two-way affair for humans than it is for ants, frogs, cuckoos, or rabbits. Their environments
impinge on them no less than those sentient creatures impinge on their surroundings, be these physical, natural, or social.
Mobile sentient creatures tend to respond to their environments with specific niche-constructions. Even among the very
versatile Primates, humans are distinctive in carrying out a remarkably wide and varied range of niche-constructions
that often are socio-culturally differentiable. To aspects of these, moreover, we are able to assign mnemonic signifiers
that we can communicate or transmit selectively in ways that are particularly flexible and efficient (notably, spoken
language) with regard to trying to achieve appropriate rapid outcomes. Most of us have learnt (often to our cost) that
outcomes are easier to envisage, and subsequently to recognise, than were our motives and underlying motivation. This
is so, whether the outcome is playfulness, obtaining food or drink, making this or that object, speaking or singing,
walking or dancing, doodling or sculpting. The mistakes we make notwithstanding, it is the exceptional human capacity
to draw on the different varieties of memory retained in our brains (short-term working memory and long-term working
memory, procedural memory, semantic memory, episodic memory, and prospective memory) which enables our
hierarchical mechanistic minds to work as self-evidencing, neurobiological inference machines. Plausibility has grown
in recent years that the underlying generative process is dependent on neuronal predictive processing and consequent
updating of Bayesian model evidence referrable to neuronally-registered Bayesian priors [88] [154] [155] [156],
following research at the close of the 20th century which showed the neurophysiological significance of neuronal
predictive processing [157]. It is important to stress that it is our embodied activity of enactment which realises any
generative model whatsoever that may have been formed by priors about what our surroundings could have led us to
expect or anticipate. In other words, active inference is about acting (reacting) and not about readjusting or re-presenting
a model (representing it "mentally"); thus, more than merely in some disembodied cerebral hierarchical mind, the
reference of the generative model is in respect of the neurobiological work undertaken physically by a brain's
hierarchically mechanistic mind.
The foregoing paragraphs highlight the matter that the development of our modern human brain’s complex
consciousness, characterised by widespread attention-sharing and communal reflexion about alternative policies, is a
matter that has to have been, without doubt, a drawn-out biological process. It involved aspects of genetics which
enhanced gene-culture evolution (e.g., human accelerated regions HARs, and epigenetic impingements on gene-
expression), and no doubt produced some demographically-skewed reproductively-effective communities in which
14
learnt transmission of behaviour played a part. Any or all of those aspects will have influenced human ontogenetic
evolution, though, most likely, the corresponding neurobiological evolutionary changes were imperceptibly gradual. It
should be borne in mind that, separated within the skull from the world beyond, our brain houses between 60 and 100
billion neurones, many of which have hundreds or even thousands of synapses with others, so that interchange of each
with its surrounding cells affects outcomes of active inference and consequent exchange with the surrounding
neighbourhood of our body and the bodies of our fellow creatures. Our brain is a scaled-up Primate brain, remarkable
perhaps, albeit not extraordinary [158]. What is extraordinary, however, is that what evolved in our ancestral
phylogenetic lineage has had the unique outcome of a communicative fluency that has evolved in us (but not in great
apes, or any other creature) which is demonstrated by spoken language that enables (or, at the very least, enhances) the
transmission of information about alternative interpretations of our perceptions about what is happening around us and
of alternative interpretations of courses of action that are open to us; this open-ended [159] approach to
behavioural alternatives seems to be a uniquely human trait in hierarchically mechanistic minds that derives from how
information is deployed.
3. Information and homininan small worlds
It is not unthinkable that, from the Late Miocene onwards, the transmission of information in and between
neighbouring homininan very small-world networks affected differential evolvability within the hominin Hominini tribe
of the homininan Hominina subtribe vis-à-vis the paninan Panina subtribe. A plausible evolutionary conjecture is that
during the period between ~7.5 and ~3.5 Ma homininan behaviour evolved through the very slowly-increasing versatility
of tiny, contiguous, familial units of rarely above a dozen members present together at any given time, whose reciprocal
exchange of kin of both sexes produced mixed-sex philopatry in social units, very often including an alloparental
individual (predominantly under thirty years old), which co-existed and evolved in mosaic landscapes. Whatever may
have been the social arrangements of paninans during the Late Miocene and Pliocene, it is not unreasonable to imagine,
contrary to some rational arguments [63] [64], that they may have been unlike those contemporary chimpanzees or
bonobos which nowadays have multifemale-multimale troops. Whether or not primaeval paninan or primaeval
homininan social units in the Late Miocene were as small as those of contemporary gorillas today cf.[160], they likely
never contained more than a dozen individuals. The emergence in humans of large multifemale-multimale stable social
units (e.g., bands) may have been a late evolutionary development, perhaps only in Late Pleistocene Homo and
associated with wide-ranging ecological dominance enabled by a capacity to consider and carry out alternative plans
[161] envisageable by virtue of an expanding zone of bounded surprisal that had far outstripped that of paninans.
Conflict between contiguous social units may have been a very much later tendency, maybe absent before the Middle
Pleistocene, in response, perhaps, to depletion of local environmental resources from causes ranging from increase in
local densities of homininan populations to scarcity of locally-available bioenergetic resources on account of floods,
wild-fires, droughts, plagues of pests, competition by other creatures, increase of predators, earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, or disruptive secular climatic change.
In contrast to a widespread presumption by anthropologists that hostility between chimpanzee troops were to
have been, ipso facto, a foundational component of homininan social units, it is proposed that an evolving broadening
of homininan zones of bounded surprisal (ZBS) enabled a greater tolerance of neighbours. This implies the plausibility
that, through active inference under the free energy principle, there likely began to evolve neurobiological cerebral
dispositions, probably in Australopithecus, which fostered coordination within social units and cooperation of their
component members, and the eventual consequence of coordination, cooperation, and collaboration with neighbouring
social units. It is important to distinguish between the 3 "co-" words, because they are not synonyms. Coordination of
anything ensures that its constituents or components are functionally in harmonious relationship (e.g., they may be
people as in an army, or cogs as in a machine). Cooperation on anything involves working together (joint action) with
somebody on something. Collaboration about something involves working together (joint action) with somebody
towards achieving a goal or particular outcome or aim. Note the different prepositions, and the different placing of
“anything” and “something”; also note that cooperation is about working effortfully, whereas collaboration is about
potential achievement where the exchange of relevant information is fundamental. The apogee of human cooperative
communication was the outcome of a drawn-out, uneven development that probably came to fruition in Homo during
the Pleistocene, enhanced eventually by spoken language (involving exchange of information by symbolic reference
and an ability to rearrange referrable items stored in memory which far exceeds the ability of great apes). As already
quoted above, "cooperative communication” between individuals could be the result of “an evolved adaptive prior belief
that their mental states are aligned with, or similar to, those of conspecifics” prioritising behaviours that “minimize
uncertainty and optimize an individual’s internal model of the world… allowing for the development of a shared
narrative that is used to disambiguate interactants’ (hidden and inferred) mental states" [103].
15
If the onset of the expanded homininan ZBS were to have been indeed in the Pliocene genus Australopithecus,
it behoves us to conjecture a reasonable scenario of social arrangements. In contrast to paninan social arrangements,
they should fulfil the criterion of enhancing the recognition of, and the coordinated response to information that is
imparted. These are attainable more rapidly, more accurately, and more appropriately in the absence of the hustle and
bustle of a noisy or rowdy troop in which customary behaviour crowds out or stifles unaccustomed individual responses
which, so to speak, get nipped in the bud. By contrast, continual social intercourse, within and between very small, agile,
neighbourly units that are related by kin, fosters the expeditious use of novel information. Within homininan units,
paternal involvement in a very small social unit likely enhanced the transmission of information between members,
thereby heightening versatile awareness, from infancy onwards, about alternative policies, strategies or flexible tactics
which may be available in situational contexts that provoke less cognitive surprise in duly-prepared hominans than in
ill-prepared paninans. Such involvement does not imply paternal concern for young offspring; there are indeed
contemporary societies, including some hunter-gatherers, in which fathers do not pay particular attention to their young
children. Considered from a neuroethological standpoint, it is plausible that the exposure of toddlers to the several
respective behaviours performed by individuals of all ages who were close female and male kin, came to influence,
imperceptibly by active inference, the gradual development, during several million years of homininan evolution, of the
behavioural variability, carried out by other members of their very small tightly-knit social units, that was - and is -
observed closely by toddlers. It is an evolutionary development that has resulted in a broader human ZBS than that of
great apes. It enables our extraordinarily wide range of personal behaviour, including attempts to copy faithfully (i.e.,
with accuracy and precision) some behaviours of other individuals or to explore, in open-ended fashion, unanticipated
novel or surprising aspects of self-generated behavioural "accidents" ("Eureka!”, "Aha!" moments).
Nevertheless, almost all of these are ephemeral. Very, very few ever became transmitted such as to be
recognisable in the Pleistocene record as instigators of widespread heritable behavioural traits (a.k.a., “cumulative
culture”). Very small-world behaviours are as much subject to punctuated evolution as are biological species. Drawing
on active inference, and paying due regard to time-perspectivism, “bottom-up” considerations highlight the pitfalls to
transmission [48]. A formal interpretation, “top-down”, is that social biases against non-conformity impede recognition
of useful possibilities [162]. Collapses of homininan populations, inferred from evident punctuated evolutionary
palaeogenetic bottlenecks (e.g., in the genus Homo cf.[163] [164]; perhaps leading to the disappearance of Homo
floresiensis, H. naledi, H. luzonensis, “Denisovans”, and maybe Neanderthals) could have reduced the widespread
availability of, or accessibility to useful possibilities, though if occasionally these were available and accessible a
survivor might have grasped and developed them.
The external dynamics of a relationship between one social unit and another, are not independent of the internal
dynamics of each, that, in turn, depend on the developing internal dynamics of each constituent adult or growing child.
Behaviour at any one of these three levels may inform behaviour at any other, particularly so within and between “small-
world” social units of around a dozen members each. Perhaps a word more appropriate than “levels” is “windows”, by
analogy with 3 windows that are open together, all at the same time on my computer screen throughout an interactively
evolving 3-person video chat. It may not be far-fetched to regard each level (or open window) as containing elements
that perhaps are functionally analogous to those biological ones, within any organism and its constituent living cells,
which may be regarded as network “motifs” defined by feed-forward and feed-back controls that are genetically or
epigenetically influenced by transcription factors [165]. In terms of graphical network analysis, such “motifs”
correspond to subgraphs. Plausibly, the internal dynamics of a social unit impinged externally on the evolvability of
neighbouring social units that, together with it, made up a broad spatiotemporal network which, as long as other things
were equal, approximated to a power-law distribution of the node-degrees. Likewise, within each social unit, the
dynamics of the behavioural impingements of its constituent adults and children continually affected the evolving
network formed by them within their social unit. Moreover, impingements by their own within-body network of
interacting physiological and other internal systems and experiences affected its own life-long evolution. The temporal
scales or rates of evolvability of the three “windows” must be distinguished. A particular matter of interest involves the
transactional asynchronicity of reciprocal collaborative behaviour between individuals (e.g., “I’ll help you this time;
you’ll help me next time”): conscious awareness and memory of it characterise human relations and reputations both
within and between social units. The matter has been considered recently [166] [167] from a perspective of statistical
physics which combines a version of the Lenz-Ising model of physical phase transitions with Markov chain Monte Carlo
random sampling (e.g., Metropolis-Hastings algorithm) where it is not possible to carry out direct sampling of a
probability distribution. Perhaps this approach could offer a way to elucidate and model the Plio-Pleistocene homininan
behavioural evolutionary divergence from paninan behaviour.
Obvious evolutionary limitations that can impede transmission of behaviour (such as skills) within and between
each of the aforementioned three dynamical levels, or open windows, are imposed by spatial expansion or temporal
16
extension, either of which can eradicate interconnectivity or power-law approximation, or both [168] [169]. Perhaps
theoretical aspects of this problem, with regard to the evolution of early homininan behaviour, could well be treated in
the future from the graphical network standpoints of edge-betweenness and node-betweenness [132]. Computational
physicist Mark Newman [124, p. 173] wrote, “It seems plausible that nodes with high betweenness centrality could have
influence within a network, by virtue of their control over information passing between others… The nodes with highest
betweenness are also the ones whose removal from the network will most disrupt communications between other
nodes...” Redundancy of the information transferred seems to protect against disruption [170]. Modelling Early
Pleistocene human behaviour and its technical products could be attempted perhaps along the lines of Newman’s
percolation algorithm [124, pp. 595-599]. The matter of adaptive zones (fitness landscapes) could well be pertinent, and
probably the ZBS notion is relevant at both internal and external levels of behaviour of each very small-world social
unit. A scale-free approach, if possible, might be capable of embracing modularly evolving outcomes cf.[171] that are
commensurate with time-perspectivism, though, at best, reconstructing the gradual evolution of a complex system can
provide no more than plausible models for interpreting human evolution and early Palaeolithic behaviour. The difficulty
to be overcome is that of how to link network properties, such as centrality, redundancy, percolation, and asynchronicity,
with the informational dynamics of the transmissibility of the endurance of behavioural innovation and skills in the face
of unforeseeable constraints or hazards (e.g., population collapse, etc.) when viewed through the lens of time-
perspectivism. Investigation could involve recourse to hypergraph modelling (cf., [172] [173] of plausibly feasible ways
by which very small-world social units of primaeval homininans likely evolved differentially in evolving spatiotemporal
circumstances between ~7.5 and ~1.3 Ma, whereafter Homo was the sole remaining genus.
The suggestion put forward here is that over the course of three or four million years, during the Pliocene and
well into the Early Pleistocene, homininan behaviour, evolved through the slowly increasing versatility of tiny,
contiguous, familial social units, each containing rarely more than a dozen members present together at any given time,
whose reciprocal exchange of kin of both sexes produced mixed-sex philopatry (syn., "bisexual" philopatry) in social
units, very often including alloparental members (almost all under thirty years old), which co-existed and evolved in
mosaic landscapes by the creation of contiguous neighbouring units by budding, plausibly within a two- or three-hour
walk away. The composition of contemporaneous paninan units in woodland environments may have foreshadowed
their present configuration, though possibly the dearth of fossil remains might suggest that troops could have been
smaller than nowadays. Be that as it may, the proposal here is that the phylogenetic split between paninans and
homininans was between multifemale-multimale paninan social units (troop or mobs) with male philopatry, and small
homininan units characterised by mixed-sex philopatry comprising nuclear family units under stable biparental care,
with close paternal proximity to infants and children as well as their maternal care, from which there was mixed-sex
dispersal that enabled the colonisation of new localities and possible expansion of mixed-sex philopatry in neolocalities
nearby.
With regard to behavioural hereditability, stable biparental care influences not only intragenerational
relationships but also intergenerational hereditary demographic structures: thus Gendron et al. wrote [174, pp. 188-190]
“…the process of regulating a body’s internal systems, called allostasis…, drives the bidirectional relationship between
the brain as a generator of culture (in concert with other brains) and a product of culture… humans are social animals
because we assist one another with the necessary physiological regulation to meet the changing demands of the physical
and social environment – that is, humans help one another to establish and maintain allostasis… (which) is supported
by the physiological dependencies that arise during early social contact... … humans’ extended period of physiological
dependency on caregivers provides the necessary conditions for infant brains to wire themselves to their physical and
social surroundings. As the infant brain bootstraps a set of experiences into its wiring, it develops a model for how to
best regulate its body in a given set of contexts (i.e., within the constraints of their culturally shaped world). The
“outside” conditions of this world offer affordances or “possibilities for action” that establish and maintain the brain’s
internal model, which is inherently culture-dependent... … one brain’s internal model guides behavior, which creates a
set of affordances that impact others’ allostasis, shaping their behavior and experiences in turn. Eventually, allostatic
regulation shifts away from primary caregiving relationships, which are supplanted by self-regulation based on a set of
learned concepts that are continually reinforced by the social structuring of the environment. This social dependency
across the lifespan further ensures the transmission of culture across generations."
The creation of neighbouring contiguous social units by budding, and thus related by kin, permitted neighbourly
cooperation and even collaboration in activities such as obtaining and sharing bioenergetic resources whenever local
environmental circumstances or constraints may have led to exchange of information about what, where, and when a
resource might be available that could be shared appropriately. It is plausible to regard as fundamental the cooperative
transmission of both the prerequisite information about aims like those, and the feasible collaborative means to achieve
them. The “small-world” concept [175] [176] is suitable for theoretical network analysis [177] which is appropriate for
17
modelling the transmission of information among continually budding cells of an evolving network [177] such as the
postulated very small social units of primaeval homininans. Against the existential fragility of such small units, very,
very many of which undoubtedly succumbed to extinction within a few generations, there must be weighed a plausible
counterpoise of greater or faster development of information gleaned by each in their respective contiguous geographical
areas about the availability of bioenergetic resources necessary for survival and reproduction. This information
determines the fitness of a social unit, where fitness here can be understood as in Bianconi-Barabási model networks
[177 Chapter 6] [178]. As budding of units increases, complications develop on account of not only the randomness and
vagaries of the budding process, but also the exchange of information between nodes of the network of buds. A well-
studied aspect of network topology is that of how the dynamics of scale-free distributions of nodes (i.e., vertices in graph
topology) can produce complexity, likened often to abrupt phase transitions in statistical physics and chemistry, e.g,
ice↔water↔steam, cf.[177 Chapter 3]). Perhaps whenever new accrued knowledge became overwhelmingly present in
a very small homininan social unit, the experience was “phase-like” in as much as there may have taken place an abrupt
transition to a shared state of awareness of what had accrued, with corresponding behavioural modifications.
Nevertheless, it may well be that only after the emergence of the genus Homo was there an evolutionary trend towards
loosening the shackles of routine custom defined by inherited (“instinctive”) ethological responses.
An interesting possibility is that transitional acceleration might have been involved not only in the original Early
Pleistocene behavioural distinctiveness of the genus Homo, but also in subsequent (perhaps Middle Pleistocene)
developments in cooperative communication and communicative fluency (e.g., using spoken language with symbolic
referents) and so-called “cumulative” technological culture. Be that as it may, it could be worthwhile for network
scientists to collaborate with those physicists and mathematicians who are involved with the formal analysis of active
inference under the free energy principle, as well as with mathematicians interested in evolutionary processes or
biological transitions, in order to consider the possibility of developing formal models that could link their respective
interests, with a view to investigating models of complex systems that might offer alternatives to be held up against
palaeoanthropological and Palaeolithic evidence, in order to suggest accounts that others might consider plausible of
the evolution - biological, social, psychological, cultural - from the Late Miocene to the 21st century BCE, of "Homo
informatio".
There undoubtedly was an ever-present vulnerability of very small-world social units to mishaps or misfortune.
There were existential threats to the reproductive success of very small, agile, fragile, social units. It is likely that they
resulted in many false dawns, and underlie the imperceptibly slow, gradual evolution of the homininan clade, including
the evolution of and within the genus Homo, not only its morphology, but also its cognitive and technical aptitudes (cf.
[48]), shielded, according to the proposal offered here, by the advantage over paninans that was conferrable by a greater
facility in the exchange between small neighbouring kin-related familial units of information appropriate for maintaining
network fitness in a wider diversity of environments than the woodland habitats of paninan mobs. Plausibly, very many
homininan units were extinguished because of unforeseeable circumstances. Exchange of information diminished or
ceased between very small-world units that became widely separated by distance from other units, and often isolated. It
is therefore unsurprising that assemblages of core-and-flake artefacts continued to be the sole handiwork at some
Palaeolithic sites when at others bifacial preparation of hand-axes was taking place. Prehistoric archaeologists and
ethnographers are accustomed to documenting noteworthy differences in the behavioural or technological complexity
of people who lived at the same time but in different places. Their extinction doubtless expunged from the fossil record
many “palaeospecies” of homininan genera, including “palaeospecies” of the genus Homo. They could have ranged
from unanticipated deaths, illnesses, maladaptive genetic inheritance, or the preponderance in a very small social unit
of either boys or girls, to unpredictable external impingements of climate, predators, or sporadic uncooperative or
uncollaborative homininans with ensuing friction or interpersonal conflict, and here a statistical possibility of personal
non-cooperation or non-collaboration by an individual is compatible with considerations about active inference under
the free energy principle, which indicate that a lone individual could refuse to accept change and establish a social unit
that maintained previous behaviour [179]. Such idiosyncratic responses may underlie the coetaneous existence of
anachronistic archaeological assemblages or asynchronous aspects. Just as with other organisms, stochastic processes
affected the evolution of our human ancestors and their behaviour [48].
4. Concluding Remarks
The suggestion proposed above is that the different ecological surroundings that had been evolving from Late
Miocene times impinged differently on the last common ancestor of woodland-dwelling paninans and mosaic-landscape-
dwelling homininans. The former evolved into present-day troops with male philopatry where promiscuous males are
unable to identify their own offspring and unable to differentiate these from those of other males, hence, without close
paternal proximity, it is the mothers alone who know and rear their offspring and from whom the offspring receive most
18
of their information during the time when their brains are growing. Field research indicates that chimpanzee females on
reaching menarche do not become pregnant by mature sexually-active males in their natal troop and encounter sexual
partners in other troops, whereas sexually-active young males do not seek females in other troops whose males are
hostile anyway to alien males. The hierarchical structures of paninan troops reinforce customary routine behaviours that
crowd out the appreciation of idiosycratic behaviour, let alone any transmissibility of information related to it. Their
members' zone of bounded surprisal is less tolerant of novelty than is that of modern humans. It goes without saying
that, by natural selection, paninan evolution has involved specific adaptations to woodland-living with enough available
fruit and other foodstuff to enable reproductive success and intergenerational continuity.
It is suggested that, by four-million years ago, sparser mosaic-landscapes were affording less food-security to
homininans (e.g., Australopithecus anamensis), whose existential reproductive success (adaptive, Darwinian fitness)
was to depend on the efficient transmissibility of information about what was available where, and when, and how to
proceed to get it, including about whom it should fall upon to help to do so, all of which led very gradually to
evolutionary adaptations, which included a broadening of their zone of bounded surprisal and hence their greater
tolerance to unorthodox exploitative policies, strategies, and tactics. These, in tightly-knit families, are imbibed by
infants and young children whose fathers' behaviour together with that of all other older individuals in close proximity,
is responsible for as much transmission of information as is their mothers' attention to them. However, the flip side, so
to speak, is that fathers must be there for them in order to be watched by them. Hence fathers, by their presence, can
become aware that they have particular ties with their offspring. This became possible in small homininan social units
with mixed-sex philopatry which out of necessity could not be other than small where bioenergetic resources were
sparse locally. Rarely could large social units of homininans be sustainable in mosaic landscapes wherein the amount of
edible stuff was scanty that was forageable or scavengeable within a spatial radius of movement possible for a small
cohesive social unit while maintaining its balance of energy (i.e. intake of calories versus output of energy expended in
order to get them). Active inference underpins existential success that in human cognition is characterised by "5 E's",
being embedded, embodied, enacted, extended, and evolved.
Homininan evolution since 7.5 Ma has been an unimaginably slow, long drawn-out, process. Undeniably, small
social units can have reproductive success only if heterozygosity is maintained. This requires outbreeding. It is not
unthinkable that primaeval homininans practised mixed-sex philopatry and mixed-sex dispersal of sexually-active
members enabling thereby the establishment of neighbouring kinship-related small social units, between which there
was exchange of kin, thus maintaining heterozygosity and the fluid social relationships (unlike the hostility between
neighbouring chimpanzee troops), including expedient cooperation or collaboration. From the standpoint of the inherited
evolutionary aspects and the integrated or extended evolutionary synthesis, it is conceivable that both Hamilton’s rule
about inclusive kinship and (perhaps especially) the Baldwin effect whereby transmissibility of information and
behaviour perhaps may skew reproductive success within and between the social units of a species, fostered the survival,
reproductive success, and evolution of homininans.
The proposal outlined above need not imply that burgeoning accrued knowledge reflects somehow a new
biological evolutionary transition [180] cf.[181] [182], though, were it to be doing so, a transitional phase could be of
very long duration and incomplete at present, when consideration is taken into account of various kinds of ecological
transitions that have been analysed [183]. Putting the focus on Pliocene primaeval homininans, incipient "Homo
informatio" began to have a physical shape less like that of a chimpanzee and more like that of obligate bipedal human
beings whilst exhibiting behaviour hardly recognisable as human from any viewpoint whatsoever that takes as its
referents human behaviour that has been observed or documented, or even, by possible analogy, inferred from the
interpretation of archaeological remains from the Holocene or Late (Upper) Pleistocene. The four-million-year-long,
evolutionary transformation to behaviourally-“modern” "Homo informatio" human beings from Pliocene homininans,
whose behaviour we would be barely able to recognise as remotely human should we have been able to observe them,
has been an imperceptibly slow, long drawn-out, transitional process. It must be viewed without hubris and with time-
perspectivism. Salutary minimalist advice was given fifty years ago by the late-lamented Glynn Isaac in a timeless essay
[184] that is as relevant to anthropologists today as it was when Glynn penned it in 1974. Read it!
Acknowledgements
The following are thanked for their suggestions, advice and welcome comments: Prof. D.W. Read (UCLA), Prof. Karl
Friston (UCL), Prof. H.M. Manrique (Univ. Zaragoza), Prof. A.M. Hurtado (ASU), Ass.Prof. P.B. Badcock (Univ.
Melbourne), Dr. G. Linares-Matás (Emmanuel Coll., Cambridge), Dr. J. Clark (Corpus Christi Coll., Cambridge), Dr.
S. Valverde Castillo (CSIC - Univ. Pompeu Fabre). Two anonymous referees are thanked for their helpful comments
and suggestions, which have been taken into account in the final draft.
19
References
[1] Bobe, R., Reynolds, S.C., (2022), Hominid paleoenvironments in tropical Africa from the Late Miocene to the Early
Pleistocene, pp. 161-186, in Reynolds, S.C., Bobe, R., Eds., African paleoecology and human evolution, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139696470.015
[2] Bobe, R., d’Oliveira Coelho, J., Carvallo, S., Leakey, M., (2022), Early hominins and paleoecology of the Koobi
Fora Formation, Lake Turkana Basin, Kenya, pp. 311-331, in Reynolds, S.C., Bobe, R., Eds., African paleoecology and
human evolution, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139696470.026
[3] Domínguez-Rodrigo, M., (2014), Is the “Savanna Hypothesis” a dead concept for explaining the emergence of the
earliest hominins? Current Anthropology, 55(1), 59-81, https://doi.org/10.1086/674530
[4] Püschel, H.A., Bertrand, O.C., O’Reilly, J.E., Bobe, R. Püschel, T.A., (2021), Divergence-time estimates for
hominins provide insight into encephalization and body mass trends in human evolution, Nature Ecology & Evolution,
5, 808-19, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-021-01431-1
[5] Wikipedia, (2024), https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primate; and Wikipedia, (2024),
https://en.wikipedia.org./wiki/Human_evolution. Please take note that the word hominin, as used here, includes not only
homininans (today's humans and fossil precursorial humans) but also paninans (chimpanzees and bonobos); which is
why homininan (rather than hominin) is the word that is preferred here which exclusively refers to Australopithecus,
Paranthropus, Kenyanthropus and extinct skeletal forms of Homo. There are alternative classificatory arrangements
within the Hominidae that vary according to interpretations of inferences drawn from genetics and comparative
morphology. Readers unfamiliar with Biology should bear in mind that family, genus, and species, are fundamental and
obligatory defined categories of formal zoological taxonomy (though their names themselves can be changed), whereas
superfamily, subfamily, subgenus, subspecies, tribe, and subtribe, are optionally definable categories to which variable
content can be assigned according to differently-chosen criteria that are often the object of dispute, especially in
palaeontology. In order to side-step wrangles, the neologism “palaeospecies” is suitable wherever the context does not
require Latin identification of particular Pliocene or Early Pleistocene homininan genera or species.
[6] Cáceres, I., Cheheb, R. C., Van der Made, J., Harichane, Z., Boulaghraief, K., Sahnouni, M., (2023), Assessing
the subsistence strategies of the earliest North African inhabitants: evidence from the Early Pleistocene site of Ain
Boucherit (Algeria), Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, 15, e87, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12520-023-01783-
8
[7] Curran, S. C., Drăgușin, V., Pobiner, B., Pante, M., Hellstrom, J., Woodhead, J., Croitor, R., Doboș, A., Gogol, S. E.,
Ersek, V., Keevil, T. L., Petculescu, A., Popescu, A., Robinson, C., Werdelin, L., Terhune, C. E., (2025), Hominin
presence in Eurasia by at least 1.95 million years ago, Nature Communications, 16, e836,
https://doi.org/10.10138/s41467-025-56154-9
[8] Parenti, F., Varejão, F.G., Scardia, G., Okumura, M., Araujo, A., Ferreira Guedes, C.C., Alves Neves, W., (2024),
The Oldowan of Zarqa Valley, Northern Jordan, Journal of Paleolithic Archaeology, 7, e3, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s41982-023-00168-6
[9] Zhu, Z., Dennell, R., Huang, W., Wu, Y., Qiu, S., Yang, S., Rao, Z., Hou, Y., Xie, J, Han, J., Ouyang, T., (2018),
Hominin occupation of the Chinese Loess Plateau since about 2.1 million years ago, Nature, 599(7715), 608-612,
https://doi.org/10.10138/s41586-018-0299-4
[10] Wood, B., Richmond, B. G., (2000), Human evolution: taxonomy and paleobiology. Journal of Anatomy, 197(1),
19-60, https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-7580.2000.19710019x
[11] Wood, B., Lonergan, N., (2008), The hominin record: taxa, grades and clades, Journal of Anatomy, 212(4), 354-
376, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7580.2008.00871x
[12] Wood, B., Collard, M., (2000), The changing face of genus Homo, Evolutionary Anthropology, 8(6), 195-207,
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-6505(1999)8:6<195::AID-EVAN1>3.0.CO;2-2
20
[13] Stanley, S.M., (1995), 14. Climatic forcing and the origin of the human genus, pp. 233-243, in Effects of past global
change on life, Washington, D.C. National Academy Press, Commission on Geosciences, Environment and Resources,
Panel on Effects of Past Global Change on Life, "Studies in Geophysics", https://doi.org/10.17226/4762
[14] Sussman, R.W., Hart, D.L., (2009), Man the hunted. Primates, predators, and human evolution, expanded edition,
Boulder CO, Westview Press, and New York NY, Routledge, https://doi.org./10.4324/9780429499081
[15] Berger, L.R., (2006), Brief communication: Predatory bird damage to the Taung type-skull of Australopithecus
africanus Dart 1925. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 13(2), 166-168 https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.20415
[16] Berger, L.R., McGraw, W.S., (2007), Further evidence for eagle predation of, and feeding damage on, the Taung
child, South African Journal of Science, 103(11-12), 496-498 https://doi.org/ hdl/handle.net/10539/21436
[17] Brain, C.K., (1981), The hunters or the hunted? An introduction to African cave taphonomy. Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, esp. pp. 266-274
[18] Lee-Thorp, J., Thackeray, J.F., Van der Merwe, N., (2000), The hunters and the hunted revisited. Journal of Human
Evolution, 39, 565–576, https://doi.org/10.1006/jhev.200 0.0436
[19] Lee-Thorp, J, Sponheimer, M., (2025), The development of chemical approaches to fossil hominin ecology in South
Africa. South African Journal of Science, 121(1/2), 18529. https://doi.org/10.1715 9/sajs.2025/18529
[20] Copeland, S.R., Sponheimer, M., de Ruiter, D.J., Lee-Thorp, J.A., Codron, D., Le Roux, P.J., Grimes, V., Richards,
M.P., (2011), Strontium isotope evidence for landscape use by early hominins, Nature, 474, 76–78
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10149
[21] Hamilton, M.I., Copeland, S.R., Nelson, S.V., (2024), A reanalysis of strontium isotope ratios as indicators of
dispersal in South African hominins. Journal of Human Evolution, 187, 103480,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2023.103480
[22] Cerling, T.E., Manthi, F.K., Mbua, E.M., Leakey, L.N., Leakey, M.G., Leakey, R.E., Brown, F.H., Grine, F.E., Hart,
J.A., Kaleme, P., Roche, H., Uno, K.T., Wood, B.A., (2013), Stable isotope-based diet reconstructions of Turkana Basin
hominins, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 110(26), 10501-10506
https//doi.org/10.1073/pnas1222568110
[23] Alemseged, Z., Bobe, R., Grine, F.E., Negash, E.W., Sponheimer, M., (2020), Isotopic evidence for the timing of
the dietary shift toward C foods in eastern African Paranthropus, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
4
the U.S.A., 117(36), 21978-21984 https//doi.org/10.10173/pnas.2006221117
[24] Villmoare, B., Delezene, L.K., Rector, A.L., DiMaggio, E.N., Campisano, C.J., Feary, D.A., Ali, B.M., Chupik, D.,
Deino, A.L., Garello, D.I., Hayidara, M.A., Locke, E.M., Omar, O.A., J.R., Scott, E., Smail, I.E., Terefe, K.G., Werdelin,
L., Kimbel, W.H., Arrowsmith, J.R., Reed, K.E., (2025), New discoveries of Australopithecus and Homo from Ledi-
Geraru, Ethiopia, Nature, 13August 2025, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586.025.09390.4
[25] Plummer, T.W., Harmand, S., Finestone, E.M., Wilson, E.P., (2025), The first million years of technology: the
Lomwekian and the early Oldowan, Annual Review of Anthropology, 54, 22.1-22.17 https://doi.org/annurev-anthro-
071923-112250
[26] McPherron, S.P., Alemseged, Z., Marean, C.W., Wynn, J.G., Reed, S., Geraads, D., Bobe, R., Béarat. H.A.,
(2019), Evidence for stone-tool-assisted consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million years ago at Dikika, Ethiopia,
Nature, 466(7308), 857-860 https//doi.org/10.1038/nature09248
[27] Harmand, S., Lewis, J.E., Feibel, C.S., Lepre, C.J., Prat, S., Lenoble, A., Boës X., Quinn, R.L., Brenet, B., Arroyo,
A., Taylor, N., Clément, S., Daver, G., Brugal, J-P., Leakey, L., Mortlock, R.A., Wright, J.D., Lokorodi, S., Kirwa, C.,
Kent, D.V., Roche, H., (2015), 3.3-million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya, Nature,
521(7552), 310-315 https://doi,org/10.1038/nature14464
21
[28] Plummer, T.W., Oliver, J.S., Finestone, E.M., Ditchfield, P.W., Bishop, L.C., Blumenthal, S.A., Lemorini, C.,
Caricola, I., Bailey, S.E., Herries, A.I.R., Parkinson, J.A., Whitfield, E., Hertel, F., Kinyanjui, R.N, Vincent, T.H., Lim
Y., Louys, J., Frost, S.R., Braun, D.R., Reeves, J.S., E.D.G., Onyango, B., Lamela-Lopez, R., Forrest, F.L., He, H., Lane,
T.P., Frouin, M., Nomade, S., Wilson, E.P., Bartilol, S.K., Rotich, N.K., Potts, R., (2023), Expanded geographic
distribution and dietary strategies of the earliest Oldowan hominins and Paranthropus, Science, 379, 561–566
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abo7452
[29] Semaw, S., (2000), The world's oldest stone artefacts from Gona, Ethiopia: their implications for understanding
stone technology and patterns of human evolution between 2·6–1·5 million years ago, Journal of Archaeological
Science, 27(12), 1197-1214 https://doi.org/10.1006/j.asc.1999.0592
[30] Finestone, E.M., Plummer, T.W., Ditchfield, P.W., Reeves, J.S., Braun, D.R., Bartilol, S.K., Rotich, N.K., Bishop,
L.C., 12, Oliver, J.S., Kinyanjui, R.N., Petraglia, M.D., Breeze, P.S., Lemorini, C., Caricola, I., Obondo, P.O., Potts, R.,
(2025), Selective use of distant stone resources by the earliest Oldowan toolmakers, Science Advances, 11, eadu5838
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adu5838
[31] Williams, E.M., Key, A., de la Torre, I., Wood, B., (2025), Who made the Oldowan? Reviewing African hominin
fossils and archaeological sites from 3.5 million years ago, Journal of Anthropological Archaeology, 79, 101704
https://doi.org/j.jas.2025.101704
[32] Toth, N., Schick, K., Semaw, S., (2006), Chaper 6 A comparative study of the stone tool-making skills of Pan,
Australopithecus, and Homo sapiens, in Toth, N., Schick, K., Eds., The Oldowan: case studies into the earliest stone
age, Gosport IN, Stone Age Institute Press, “Stone Age Institute Publication Series Number 1”, pp. 155-222
[33] Delagnes, A., Roche, H., (2005), Late Pliocene hominid knapping skills: The case of Lokalalei 2C, West Turkana,
Kenya, Journal of Human Evolution, 48(5), 435-472 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2004.12.005
[34] Roche, H., (2005), Chapter 7 From simple flaking to shaping: stone knapping evolution among early hominins, in
Roux, V., Bril, B., Eds., Stone knapping, the necessary conditions for a uniquely hominin behaviour, Cambridge U.K.,
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, “McDonald Institute Monographs”
distributed by Oxbow Books, Oxford, U.K.
[35] de la Torre, I., Mora, R., Domínguez-Rodrigo, M., de Luque, L., Alcalá, L., (2003), The Oldowan industry of Peninj and
its bearing on the reconstruction of the technological skills of Lower Pleistocene hominids, Journal of Human Evolution,
44(2), 203-224 https://doi.org/10.1016/s0047-2484(02)00206-3
[36] de la Torre, I., Mora, R., (2008), The early Acheulean in Peninj (Lake Natron, Tanzania), Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology, 27(2), 244-268 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2007.12.001
[37] Gowlett, J.A.J., Harris, J.W.K., Walton, D., Wood, B.A., (1981), Early archaeological sites, hominid remains and traces
of fire from Chesowanja, Kenya. Nature, 294(5837), 125–129 https://doi.org/10.1038/294125a0
[38] Gowlett, J.A.J., Wrangham, R.W., (2013), Earliest fire in Africa: towards the convergence of archaeological evidence
and the cooking hypothesis, Azania Archaeological Research in Africa, 48(1), 5-30
https://doi.org/10.1080/0067250X.2012.756754
[39] Wrangham, R., Carmody, R., (2010), Human adaptation to the control of fire. Evolutionary Anthropology, 19(5),187-
199 https://doi.org./10.1002/evan.20275
[40] Carmody, R.N., Dannemann, M., Briggs, A.W., Nickel, B., Groopman, E.E., Wrangham, R.W., Kelso, J., (2016), Genetic
evidence of human adaptation to a cooked diet. Genome Biology and Evolution, 8, 1091-1103
https://doi.org./10.1093/gbe/evw059
[41] Lewis, M.E., Werdelin, L., (2007), 4. Patterns of change in the Plio-Pleistocene carnivorans of eastern Africa.
Implications for hominin evolution, in, Bobe, R., Alemseged, Z., Behrensmeyer, A.K. (Eds.), Hominin environments in
the East African Pliocene: an assessment of the faunal evidence, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Springer, pp. 77-105
https://doi.org/10.1007/978.1.4020.3098.7_4
22
[42] Werdelin, L., Lewis, M.E., (2005), Plio-Pleistocene Carnivora of eastern Africa: species richness and turnover
patterns, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 144, 121–144, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1096-3642.2005.00165.x
[43] Werdelin, L., Lewis, M.E., (2013), Temporal change in functional richness and evenness in the eastern African Plio-
Pleistocene carnivoran guild, Public Library of Science PLoS ONE 8(3), e57944
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057944
[44] Treves, A., Palmqvist, P., (2007), 17 Reconstructing hominin interactions with mammalian carnivores (6.0–1.8 Ma),
in Gursky, S.L., Nekaris, K.A.I., (Eds.), Primate anti-predator strategies, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Springer
Science+Business Media, “Developments in primatology: progress and prospects”, p. 365
[45] Faurby, S., Silvestro, D., Werdelin, L., Antonelli, A., (2020), Brain expansion in early hominins predicts carnivore
extinctions in East Africa, Ecology Letters, 23, 537-544 https://doi.org/10.1111.ele.13451
[46] Linares Matás, G., Clark, J., (2022), Seasonality and Oldowan behavioral variability in East Africa, Journal of
Human Evolution, 164, 103070, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2021.103070
[47] Linares Matás, G., Yravedra, J., (2022), ‘We hunt to share’: social dynamics and very large mammal butchery
during the Oldowan Acheulean transition, World Archaeology, 53(2), 225-254,
https://doi.org/10.10180/00438243.2022.2030793
[48] Manrique, H.M., Friston, K.J., Walker, M.J., (2024), “Snakes and Ladders” in paleoanthropology: from cognitive
surprise to skilfulness a million years ago, Physics of Life Reviews, 49(1), 40-70,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2024.01.004
[49] Clarke, D.L., (1968), Analytical archaeology, London, Methuen, esp. p. 262
[50] Clarke, D.L., (1972), 1. Models and paradigms in contemporary archaeology, pp. 1-60, in, Clarke, D.L.,
(Ed.), Models in archaeology, London, Methuen, esp. p. 28
[51] Isaac, G.L., (1972), 4. Early phases of human behaviour: models in Lower Palaeolithic archaeology, pp.
167-199, in, Clarke, D.L., (Ed.), Models in archaeology, London, Methuen, esp. p. 186
[52] Spalding, D.A., (1873), Instinct. With original observations on young animals, Macmillan’s Magazine, 27, 282-293
[53] Spalding, D.A., (1872), On instinct, Nature, 6, 485-486
https://doi.org/10.1038/006485a0]
[54] Baldwin, J.M., (1896), A new factor in evolution, The American Naturalist, 30(354), 441–451
https://doi.org/10.1086/276408
[55] Hinton, G.E., Nowlan, S.J., (1987), How learning can guide evolution, Complex Systems, 1(3), 495-502,
http://dl.acm.org.doi.10.1109.CEC45853.2021.9504900
[56] Maynard Smith, J., (1987). Natural selection, When learning guides evolution. Nature, 329(6142), 761-762,
https://doi.org/10.1038.329761a0
[57] Fontanari, J.F., Santos, M., (2017), The revival of the Baldwin effect, The European Physical Journal B, 90, 186
https//doi.org/10.1140/epjn/e2017-80409-8
[58] Morgan, T.J.H., Suchow, J.W., Griffiths, T.L., (2020), What the Baldwin Effect affects depends on the nature of
plasticity, Cognition, 197, 104165 htps//doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2019.104165]
[59] Deacon, T.W., (2003), 5. Multilevel selection in a complex adaptive system: the problem of language origins, pp.
87-106, in Weber, B.H., Depew, D.J., Eds., Evolution and learning. The Baldwin Effect reconsidered, Cambridge MA
and London, The MIT Press, "A Bradford book"
23
[60] Godfrey-Smith, P., Dennett, D., Deacon, T.W., 6. Postscript on the Baldwin effect and niche construction, pp. 107-
112, in Weber, B.H., Depew, D.J., Eds., Evolution and learning. The Baldwin Effect reconsidered, Cambridge MA and
London, The MIT Press, "A Bradford book"
[61] Laland, K.N., Odling-Smee, F.J., Feldman, M.W., (1996), The evolutionary consequences of niche construction: a
theoretical investigation using two-locus theory, Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 9(3), 293–
316, https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1420-9101.1996.9030293.x
[62] Laland, K.N., Odling-Smee, F.J., Feldman, M.W., (1999), Evolutionary consequences of niche construction and
their implications for ecology, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 96(18), 10242-10247,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.18.10242
[63] Chapais, B., (2008), Primeval kinship: How pair-bonding gave birth to human society, Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press, (passim), https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv1kz4h57
[64] Chapais, B., (2014), Complex kinship patterns as evolutionary constructions, and the origins of sociocultural
universals, Current Anthropology, 55(6), 751-783, https://doi.org/10.1086/678972
[65] Milich, K.M., (2024), Male‐philopatric nonhuman primates and their potential role in understanding the evolution
of human sociality, Evolutionary Anthropology, 33, e22014, https://doi.org/10.1002.evan.22014, and see references
therein
[66] Hill, K.R., Walker, R.S., Božičević, M., Eder, J., Headland, T., Hewlett, B., Hurtado, A.M., Marlowe, F., Wiessner,
P., Wood, B., (2011), Co-residence patterns in hunter-gatherer societies show unique human social structure, Science,
331(6022), 1286-1289, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1199071
[67] Sterelny, K., (2012), The evolved apprentice. How evolution made humans unique, Cambridge, MA, and London,
UK, The MIT Press, “A Bradford Book”, p. 33
[68] Farrell, M., (2025), What would imaginary ancestors do? Thought experiments and intuitive plimausibility in
human cognitive evolution, Biology & Philosophy, 40, 14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-025-09986-0
[69] Foley, R.A., Lee, P.C., (1989), Finite social space, evolutionary pathways, and reconstructing hominid behavior,
Science, 243(4893), 901-906, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2493158
[70] King, G., Bailey, G., (2015), Tectonics and human evolution, Antiquity, 80(308), 265-286
https://doi.org/10.10017/S0003598X00093613
[71] Kübler, S., Rucina, S., Reynolds, S., Owenga, P., Bailey, G., King, G.C.P. (2016), Edaphic and topographic
constraints on exploitation of the Central Kenya Rift by large mammals and early hominins, Open Quaternary, 2, 5,
pp.1-8 https://doi.org/10.5334/oq.21
[72] Kübler, S., Bailey, G., Rucina, S., Devès, M., King, G.C.P., (2020), Rift dynamics and archaeological sites:
Acheulean land use in geologically unstable settings, pp. 42-63, in Cole, J., McNabb, J., Grove, M., Hosfield, R., Eds,
Landscapes of human evolution Contributions in honour of John Gowlett, Oxford, Archaeopress
[73] Maxwell, S., Hopley, P.J., Upchurch, P., Soligo, C., (2018), Sporadic sampling, not climatic forcing, drives observed
early hominin diversity, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 115(19), 4891-4896,
https://doi/org/10.1073/pnas.1721538115
[74] Bailey, G., (1981), 9. Concepts, time-scales and explanations in economic prehistory, pp. 97-117, in Sheridan, A.,
Bailey, G., Eds., Economic archaeology: towards an integration of ecological and social approaches, Oxford, British
Archaeological Reports, “International Series 96”
[75] Bailey, G.N., (1983), Concepts of time in Quaternary prehistory, Annual Review of Anthropology, 12, 165-192,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.an.12.1001838.001121
24
[76] Bailey, G., (1987), Breaking the time barrier, Archaeological Review from Cambridge, 6(1), 5-20,
https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM32037
[77] Bailey, G., (2007), Time perspectives, palimpsests and the archaeology of time, Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology, 26(2), 198-223, https//dx-doi.org/10.1016/j.aa.2006.08.002
[78] Bailey, G., (2008), Time perspectivism: origins and consequences, pp. 13-30, in Holdaway, S., Wandsnider, L.,
Eds., Time in archaeology: time perspectivism revisited, Salt Lake City, The University of Utah Press
[79] Murray, T., Walker, M.J., (1988), Like WHAT? A practical question of analogical inference and archaeological
meaningfulness, Journal of Anthropological Archaeology, 7, 248-287, https://doi.org/10.1016/0278-4165(88)90010-4
N.B., The published version contains numerous errors, the most egregious is on p. 263 where “x=p=a=m and that
y=q=b=n” appears in place of the submitted manuscript’s “x≠p≠a≠m and that y≠q≠b≠n”, and among other egregious
departures from the manuscript are “worked” for “word” on p. 262, and “con-linear” for “non-linear” on p. 264: all the
many errors owe to the journal's editor informing the authors that, on account of a personal editorial logistical
inconvenience, proofs would be corrected by the editor himself and would not be sent to the authors who thus were
denied any possibility of contrasting their manuscript with what the editor arranged, or rather re-arranged, to be
published.
[80] Manrique, H.M., Walker, M.J., (2023), To copy or not to copy? That is the question! From chimpanzees to the
foundation of human technological culture. Physics of Life Reviews, 45(1), 6-24,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2023.02.005
[81] Rovelli, C., (2017), Reality is not what it seems. The journey to quantum gravity, London, U.K., Penguin Random
House, Penguin Books
[82] Kondepudi, D., Dixon, J., De Bari, B., (2022), 4. From dissipative structures to biological evolution: a
thermodynamic perspective, pp. 91-118, in, Dambricourt Malassé, A., (Ed.), Self-organization as a new paradigm in
evolutionary biology, from theory to applied cases in the tree of life. Cham, Springer, “Evolutionary Biology New
Perspectives on its Development, 5”, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04783-1
[83] Badcock, P.B., (2012), Evolutionary systems theory: a unifying meta-theory of psychological science, Review of
General Psychology, 16(1), 10-23, https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026381
[84] Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.J., Ramstead, M.J.D., (2019a), The hierarchically mechanistic mind: a free-energy
formulation of the human psyche, Physics of Life Reviews, 31(10), 104-121, https//doi.org/j.plrev.2018.10.002
[85] Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.J., Ramstead, M.J.D., Ploeger, A., Hohwy, J., (2019b), The hierarchically mechanistic
mind: an evolutionary systems theory of the human brain, cognition, and behavior, Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral
Neuroscience, 19, 1319–1351, https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-019-00721-3
[86] Ramstead, M.J.D., Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.J., (2018), Answering Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy
formulation, Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1-16, https://doi.org/2017.09.001
[87] Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O’Doherty, J., Pezzulo, G., (2016), Active inference and
learning, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 68, 862-879, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
[88] Ramstead, M.J.D., Constant, A., Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.J., (2019), Variational ecology and the physics of sentient
systems, Physics of Life Reviews, 31, 188-205, https:/doi.org/10.1016/j-plrev.2018.12.002
[89] Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., Pezzulo, G., (2017), Active inference: a process theory,
Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49, https://doi.org/10 .1162/NECO_a_00912
[90] Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., Friston, K., (2022), Active inference: the free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior,
Cambridge MA and London, The MIT Press
[91] Sajid, N., Ball, P.J., Parr, T., Friston, K.J., (2021), Active inference: demystified and compared, Neural
Computation, 33(3), 674-712, https//doi.org/10.1162/neco_a:01357
25
[92] Friston, K., (2010), The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127-
138, https://doi.org/10.1038/nm2787
[93] Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sajid, N., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Pavliotis, G.A., Parr, T., (2023), The free energy
principle made simpler but not too simple, Physics Reports, 1024,1-29, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2023.07.001
[94] Friston, K.J., (2019), Waves of prediction, Public Library of Science Biology PLoSBiology, 17(10), e3000426,
https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000426
[95] Friston, K., Friedman, D.A., Constant, A., Knight, V.B., Fields, C., Parr, T., Campbell, J.O., (2023), A variational
synthesis of evolutionary and developmental dynamics, Entropy, 25, e964, https//doi.org/10.3390/e25070964
[96] Pezzulo, G., Parr, T., Friston, K., (2021), The evolution of brain architectures for predictive coding and active
inference, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society series B, 377, 20200531,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0531
[97] Friston, K.J., Frith, C.D., (2015), Active inference, communication and hermeneutics, Cortex, 68, 129-143,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2015.03.025
[98] Friston, K., Lin, M., Frith, C.D., Pezzulo, G., Hobson, J.A., Obaka, S.O., (2017), Active inference, curiosity and
insight, Neural Computation, 29(10), 2633-2683, https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_00999
[99] Friston, K.J., Parr, T., Heins, C., Constant, A., Friedman, D., Isomura, T., Fields, C., Verbelen, T., Ramstead, M.,
Clippinger, J., Frith, C.D., (2024), Federated inference and belief sharing, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,
156, 105500, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105500
[100] Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., Pezzulo G., (2015), Active inference and epistemic
value, Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187-224, https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
[101] Parr, T., Friston, K.J., (2017), Working memory, attention, and salience in active inference, Scientific Reports, 7,
14768, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-15249-0
[102] Pezzulo, G., Parr, T., Friston, K., (2021), The evolution of brain architectures for predictive coding and active
inference, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society series B, 377, 20200531,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0531
[103] Vasil, J., Badcock, P.B., Constant, A., Friston, K., (2020), A world unto itself: human communication as active
inference, Frontiers in Psychology, 11, e417, https//doi.org/10.3389/f.psyg.2020.00417
[104] Bourke, A.F.G., (2014), Hamilton’s rule and the causes of social evolution, Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society series B, 369, 20130362 https://doi.org/10.1038/rstb.2013. 0362
[105] Boyd, R., Schonmann, R.H., Vicente, R., (2014), Hunter–gatherer population structure and the evolution of
contingent cooperation, Evolution and Human Behaviour, 35, 219-227,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2014.02.002].
[106] Clutton-Brock, T., (2009), Cooperation between non-kin in animal societies, Nature, 462(7269), 51-57 (p. 53),
htpps://doi.org/10.1038/nature08336
[107] Houghton, C., (2024), Cooperation as well as learning: a commentary on ‘How learning can guide evolution’ by
Hinton and Nowlan, arXiv, 2409.15609v1
[108] Okasha, S., (2018), Agents and goals in evolution, Oxford, Oxford University Press, (pp. 117-142)
26
[109] Pal, A., Noble, M.A., Morales, M., Pal, R., Baumgartner, M., Yang, J.W., Yim, K.M., Uebbing, S., Noonan, J.P.,
(2025), Resolving the three-dimensional interactome of human accelerated regions during human and chimpanzee
neurodevelopment, Cell, 188(6), 1504.1523 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.01.007
[110] Won, H. Huang, J., Opland, C.K., Hartl, C.L., Geschwind, D.L., (2019), Human evolved regulatory elements
modulate genes involved in cortical expansion and neurodevelopmental disease susceptibility, Nature Communications,
10, 2396, https://doi.org/10.1038/41467-019-10248-3
[111] Joshy, D., Santpere, G., Yib, S. V., (2024), Accelerated cell-type-specific regulatory evolution of the human brain.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 121(52), 2411918121,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2411918121
[112] Eşiyok, N., Liutikaite, N., Haffner, C., Peters, J., Heide, S., Oegema, C.E., Huttner, W.B., Heide, M., (2025), A
dyad of human-specific NBPF14 and NOTCH2NLB orchestrates cortical progenitor abundance crucial for human
neocortex expansion, Science Advances, 11, eads7543, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.ads7543
[113] Tan, K., Higgins, K., Liu, Q., Wilkinson, M.F., (2025), An ancient enhancer rapidly evolving in the human lineage
promotes neural development and cognitive flexibility. Science Advances, 11, eadt0534,
https://doi.org/10.1126.sciadv.adt0534
[114] Püschel, T.A., Nicholson, S.L., Baker, J., Barton, R.A., Venditti, C., (2024), Hominin brain size increase has
emerged from within-species encephalization, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 121(49),
e2409542121, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 2409542121
[115] González Forero, M., (2024), Evolutionary–developmental (evo-devo) dynamics of hominin brain size, Nature
Human Behaviour, 8, 1321–1333, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-024-01887-8
[116] González Forero, M., Gómez Robles, A., (2025a), bioRxiv 28April2025, Evidence that human skill level is more
reactive to developmental history than to genes or environment, https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.17.643651
[117] González Forero, M., Gómez Robles, A., (2025b), Why did the human brain size evolve? A way forward,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 38(1929), 20240114 https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2024.0114
[118] Finlay, B.L., Darlington, R.B., Nicastro, N., (2001), Developmental structure in brain evolution, Brain and
Behavioral Sciences, 24(2), 263-308, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003958
[119] Gould, S.J., Lewontin, R., (1979), The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: a critique of the
adaptationist programme, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 205(1161), 581–598,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.1979.0086
[120] González Forero, M., Gardner, A., (2018), Inference of ecological and social drivers of human brain-size
evolution, Nature, 557, 554-557, https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41586-018-0127-x
[121] Manrique, H.M., Read, D.W., Walker, M.J., (2024), On some statistical and cerebral aspects of the limits of
working memory capacity in Anthropoid Primates, with particular reference to Pan and Homo, and their significance
for human evolution, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 158, 105543,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2024.105543
[122] Read, D.W., Manrique, H.M., Walker, M.J., (2022), On the working memory of humans and great apes: strikingly
similar or remarkably different? Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 134, 104496,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.12.019
[123] Manrique, H.M., Walker, M.J., (2017), Early evolution of human memory. Great apes, tool-making, and cognition,
(Cham, Switzerland, Springer International, Palgrave Macmillan-Springer Nature, “Palgrave Pivot”
[124] Manrique, H.M., Read, D.W., Walker, M.J., (2024), On some statistical and cerebral aspects of the limits of
working memory capacity in Anthropoid Primates, with particular reference to Pan and Homo, and their significance
27
for human evolution, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 158, 105543,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2024.105543
[125] Ardesch, D.J., Scholtens, L.H., Li, L., Preuss, T.M., Rilling, J.K., Van den Heuvel, M.P., (2019), Evolutionary
expansion of connectivity between multimodal association areas in the human brain compared with chimpanzees,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 116(14), 7101-7106,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1818512116
[126] Griffa, A., Mach, M., Dedelley, J., Gutierrez-Barragan, D., Gozzi, A., Allali, G., Grandjean, J., Van de Ville, D,
Amico, E., (2023), Evidence for increased parallel information transmission in human brain networks compared to
macaques and male mice, Nature Communications, 14, 8216, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43971-z
[127] Samavat, M., Bartol, T.M., Harris, K.M., Sejnowski, T.J., (2024), Synaptic information storage capacity measured
with Information Theory, Neural Computation, 36(5), 781–802, https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01659
[128] Bartol Jr., T.M., Bromer, C., Kinney, J., Chirillo, M.A., Bourne, J.N., Harris, K.M., Sejnowski, T.J., (2015),
Nanoconnectomic upper bound on the variability of synaptic plasticity, eLife, 4, e10778,
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.10778
[129] Goriely, A., (2025), Eighty-six billion and counting: do we know the number of neurons in the human brain?
Brain, 148, 689–691, https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awae390
[130] De Reus, M.A., Saenger, V.M., Kahn, R.S., Van den Heuvel, M.P., (2914), An edge-centric perspective on the
human connectome: link communities in the brain, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Series B, 369,
10.1098/2013.0527, https://doi.org/rstb.20130527
[131] Girvan, M., Newman, M.E.J., (2002), Community structure in social and biological networks, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 99(12), 7821-7826, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.122653799
[132] Zhang, J., Scholtens, L.H., Wei, Y., van den Heuvel, M.P., Chanes, L., Barrett, L.F., (2020), Areas exhibit a “high-
level connector” profile in the human cortex, Cerebral Cortex, 30, 1357–1365, https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhz171
[133] Gómez-Robles, A., Nicolaou, C., Smaers, J.B., Sherwood, C.C., (2023), The evolution of human altriciality and
brain development in comparative context, Nature Ecology & Evolution, 8, 133-146, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-
023-02253-z
[134] Merton, R.K., (1949), Social theory and social structure, New York, NY, The Free Press
[135] Binford, L.R., (1977), General introduction, in, Binford, L.R., (Ed.), For theory building in archaeology. Essays
on faunal remains, aquatic resources, spatial analysis, and systemic modeling, New York, NY, San Francisco, CA, and
London, U.K., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers, Academic Press, “Studies in Archaeology”, pp. 1-12
[136] Binford, L.R., (1983), In pursuit of the past. Decoding the archaeological record, London, U.K., Thames &
Hudson (see pp. 194 and 213)
[137] Binford, L.R., (1990), Isolating the transition to cultural adaptations: an organizational approach, pp. 18-41, in,
Trinkaus, E., (Ed.), The emergence of modern humans. Biocultural adaptations in the Later Pleistocene, Santa Fe, NM,
School for Advanced Research, SARS Press, “School for Advanced Research Advanced Seminar Series”, and
Cambridge, U.K., Cambridge University Press
[138] Dayan, P., Hinton, G.E., Neal, R.M., Zemel, R.S., (1995), The Helmholtz machine, Neural Computation, 7, 889-
904, https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1995.7.5.889
[139] von Helmholtz, H., (1866/1962), Concerning the perceptions in general, treatise on physiological optics, vol. III,
New York, Dover
[140] von Helmholtz, H., (1884-1896/1921/1977), Chapter IV The facts in perception, pp. 115-185, in Cohen, R.S.,
Elkana, Y., Eds., (1977) Epistemological Writings, The Paul Hertz/Moritz Schlick Centenary of 1921, D. Reidel,
28
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, and Boston MA, "Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science XXXVIII"
(Address given during the anniversary celebrations of the Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin, in 1878 and reprinted
(1884, 1896 4th ed.) in Vorträge und Reden von Hermann von Helmholtz, vol. 2, 215-247, 387-406, Braunschweig, F.
Vieweg)
[141] Sakthivadivel, D.A.R., (2022), A constraint geometry for inference and integration,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:2203.08119
[142] Sakthivadivel, D.A.R., (2022), Functorial statistical physics: Feynman-Kac formulae and information geometries.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:2212.13618
[143] Feynman, R.P., (1972), Statistical mechanics, Reading MA, Benjamin, https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429493034
[144] Jaynes, E.T., (1957), Information theory and statistical mechanics, Physical Review, 106(4), 620–630,
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.106.620
[145] Gibson, J.J., (1977), The theory of affordances, pp. 67-82, in Shaw, R., Bransford, J., Eds., Perceiving, acting,
and knowing: toward an ecological psychology, Hillsdale NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
[146] Gibson, J.J., (1979), The ecological approach to visual perception, esp, pp. 127-143, Chapter 8, “The theory of
affordances”, Boston MA, Houghton, Mifflin & Co., reprinted in 1986 by the Taylor & Francis Group in its Psychology
Press at both Hove, UK, and New York, and again in 2014 at Hove, Psychology Press, and at New York in the Routledge
series of “Routledge Classic Editions,” https://doi.org/10.10.4324/9781315740218
[147] Fields, C., Friston, K., Glazebrook, J.F., Levin, M., (2022), A free energy principle for generic quantum systems,
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 173, 36-59, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2022.05.006
[148] Fields, C. Friston, K., Glazebrook, J.F., Levin, M., Marcianò, A., (2022), The free energy principle induces
neuromorphic development, Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering, 2, 042002, https://doi.org/10.1088/2634-
4386/aca7de
[149] Fields, C., Glazebrook, J.F., Levin, M., (2022), Neurons as hierarchies of quantum reference frames, Biosystems,
219, 104714, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2022.104714
[150] Fields, C., Glazebrook, J.F., Levin, M., (2021), Minimal physicalism as a scale-free substrate for cognition and
consciousness. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 7(2), niab013, https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab013
[151] Fields, C., Glazebrook, J.F., Marcianò, A., (2022), Sequential measurements, topological quantum field theories,
and topological quantum neural networks, Fortschritte der Physik, 70, 2200104,
https://doi.org/10.1002/prop.202200104
[152] Baker, J.M., Cariani, P., (2025), Time-domain brain: temporal mechanisms for brain functions using time-delay
nets, holographic processes, radio communications, and emergent oscillatory sequences, Frontiers in Computational
Neuroscience, 19, 1540532, https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2025.1540532
[153] Cariani, P., Baker, J.M., (2022), Time Is of the essence: neural codes, synchronies, oscillations, architectures,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 16, 898829, https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2022.898829
[154] Constant, A., Ramstead, M.J.D., Veissière, S.P.L., Campbell, J.O., Friston, K.J., (2018), A variational approach to
niche construction, Journal of The Royal Society Interface April 15(141), 20170685,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
[155] Constant, A., Ramstead, M.J.D., Veissière, S.P.L., Friston, K., (2019), Regimes of expectations: an active inference
model of social conformity and human decision making, Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 679,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
[156] Ramstead, M.J.D., Kirchhoff, M.D., Friston, K.J., (2020), A tale of two densities: active inference is enactive
inference, Adaptive Behavior, 28(4), 225–239, https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712319862774.
29
[157] Rao, R.P.N, Ballard, D.H., (1999), Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-
classical receptive-field effects, Nature Neuroscience, 2(1), 79-87, https://doi.org/10.1038/4580
[158] Herculano-Houzel, S., (2012), The remarkable, yet not extraordinary, human brain as a scaled-up primate brain
and its associated cost, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 109, suppl. 1, 10661-10668,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1201895109
[159] Morgan, T.J.H., Feldman, M.W., (2025), Human culture is uniquely open-ended rather than uniquely cumulative.
Nature Human Behaviour, 9(1), 28-42, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-024-02035-y
[160] Geary, D.C., Flinn, M.V., (2001), Evolution of human parental behavior and the human family, Parenting: Science
and Practice, 1(1-2), 5-61 https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327922PAR011&2_2
[161] Alexander, R.D., (1989), 25. Evolution of the human psyche, pp. 456-513, in Mellars, P., Stringer, C., Eds., The
human revolution. Behavioural and biological perspectives on the origins of modern humans. Edinburgh, Edinburgh
University Press
[162] Vidiella, B., Carrignon, S., Bentley, A., O’Brien, M.J., Valverde, S., (2022), A cultural evolutionary theory that
explains both gradual and punctuated change, Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 19, 2022057,
https://doi.org/10.1038/rsif.2022.057
[163] Cousins, T., Scally, A., Durbin, R., (2025), A structured coalescent model reveals deep ancestral structure shared
by all modern humans, Nature Genetics, 57, 856-864, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-025-02117-1
[164] Hu, W., Hao, Z., Du, P., Di Vicenzo, F., Manzi, G., Cui, J., Fu, Y-X., Pan Y-H., Li, H., (2023), Genomic inference
of a severe human bottleneck during the Early to Middle Pleistocene transition, Science, 381 (6661), 979-984,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abq.7487
[165] Alon, U., (2007), Network motifs: theory and experimental approaches, Nature Reviews Genetics, 8, 450-461,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2102
[166] Amaral, L.A.N., Scala, A., Barthélémy, M., Stanley, H.E., (2000), Classes of small-world networks, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 97(21), 11149-11152, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.200327197
[167] Bruggeman, J. (2024a), A sociology of humankind. How we are formed by culture, cooperation, and conflict.
London, U.K., and New York NY, Routledge (Taylor and Francis Group)
[168] Newman, M., (2018), Networks, 2nd Ed., Oxford, U.K., Oxford University Press
[169] Leleu-Merviel, S., (2004), On the relevance of percolation theory to the acquisition of human skills, pp.391-395,
in, EISTA 2004, Volume II: Education and Training Systems, Technologies and Applications, Winter Garden, FL,
International Institute of Informatics and Systemics (IIIS), “2nd International Conference on Education and Information
Systems, Technologies and Applications: EISTA 2004”, https://hal.science/hal-00467742
[170] Bruggeman J., (2024b), Collective memory, consensus, and learning explained by social cohesion, arXiv, preprint
24 October 2024, https://doi.org/arXiv:2311.14386v1
[171] Kashtan, N., Noor, E., Alon, U., (2013), Varying environments can speed up evolution, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 104(34), 13711-13716, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0611630104
[172] Álvarez-Rodríguez, U., Moreno, Y., Battison, F., Perc, M., Ferraz de Arruda, G., Latora, V., 2021, Evolutionary
dynamics of higher-order interactions in social networks, Nature Communications, 5, 586-595,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-01024-1
[173] Contisciani, M., Battison, F., De Bacco, C., 2022, Inference of hyperedges and overlapping communities in
hypergraphs, Nature Communications, 13, 7229, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34714-7)
30
[174] Gendron, M., Mesquita, B., Barrett, L.F., (2020), 6 The brain as a cultural artifact. Concepts, actions, and
experiences within the human affective niche, pp., 188-22, in Kirmayer, L.J., Worthman, C.M., Kitayama, S., Lemelson,
R., Cummings, C.A., Eds., Culture, mind, and brain: emerging concepts, models, and applications, Cambridge, U.K.,
Cambridge University Press
[175] Watts, D.J., (1999), Small worlds: The dynamics of networks between order and randomness, Princeton NJ,
Princeton University Press
[176] Watts, D.J., Strogatz, S.H., (1998), Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 373(6684), 440-442,
https://doi.10.1016/j.plrev.org/10.1038/30918
[177] Barabási, A-L., (2012), Network science, Cambridge, U.K., Cambridge University Press (available by courtesy of
Creative Commons as PDF V25 29.07.2014)
[178] Bianconi, G., Barabási, A-L., (2001), Competition and multiscaling in evolving networks, Europhysics Letters,
54(4), 436–442, http://iopscience.iop.org/0295-5075/54/4/436
[179] Kastel, N., Hesp, C., Ridderinkhof, K.R., Friston, K.J., (2023), Small steps for mankind: modeling the emergence
of cumulative culture from joint active inference communication, Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 16, 944986.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbot.2022.944986
[180] Ginsburg. S., Jablonka, E., (2021), Evolutionary transitions in learning and cognition, Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society series B, 376, 20190766, https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0766
[181] Szathmáry, E., Maynard Smith, J., (1995), The major evolutionary transitions, Nature, 374(6519), 227-232,
https://doi.org/10.1038/374227a0
[182] Maynard Smith, J., Szathmáry, E., (1995), The major transitions in evolution, Oxford, U.K., Oxford University
Press
[183] Morozov, A., Feudel, U., Hastings, A., Abbott, K.C., Cuddington, K., Heggerud, B.M., Petrovskii, S., (2024),
Long-living transients in ecological models: recent progress, new challenges, and open questions, Physics of Life
Reviews, 51, 423-441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2024.11.004
[184] Isaac, G.Ll., (1976), The activities of early African hominids. A review of archaeological evidence from
the time span two and a half to one million years ago, pp. 483-514, in Isaac, G.Ll., McCown, E.R., Eds.,
Human origins. Louis Leakey and the East African evidence, Menlo Park, CA, Reading MA, London,
Amsterdam, Don Mills Ontario, Sydney, W.A.Benjamin, "A Staples Press Book”
31
Table 1: A Possible Self-Reproducing Very Small-World Social Unit
Table 1: A Possible Self-Reproducing Very Small-World Social Unit
A possible 15-year-long developing membership of a nuclear family is shown, elaborated from the creation of the first pregnancy by its founding partners of U1
0
to the final year of their life when they are 25 years old and there are 10 members. A more plausible scenario is one where U1 consists of a reproductive-age male
0
with two female partners of reproductive-age (and maybe another reproductive-age male with none). Even if one baby was born every year, the likelihood of
infants/children dying before reaching adulthood renders it plausible that at any one time such a U1 would not have consisted of 20 members; perhaps rarely more
0
than 15+ and plausibly not more than a dozen being together at any one moment in time. The situation thus envisaged need not imply a theory of emigration by
only post-menarcheal female offspring (i.e., from units notionally of male philopatric characteristics), were there also to have existed mixed-sex philopatry and
mixed-sex emigrations that founded neolocalities, at some of which mixed-sex philopatry could have been perpetuated; furthermore, because brother-sister incest
probably no more characterised primordial humans than it does modern chimpanzees, one U1 member likely was a reproductive-age emigrant from some notional
0
neighbouring social unit “V”, not shown in Table 1 but who would lend plausibility to a suitably-modified Table 1 that included such an individual. Reproductive
continuity is possible within small family units in which few surviving newborn members survive beyond the ageof 25 years, as indeed has been the case many in
communities lacking adequate sanitary or health care in recent centuries.
Sequence of Unit membership: birth partners(m,f) together with male(m) Times, t, in Offspring and sex at Ages in years of family
increase by and female(f) offspring added in order of birth (years of age in years from times (years) t0,t1,t2…. members at time t.
births in a brackets). each (m=male;f=female)
monogamous It is assumed there are never miscarriages, still-births, or infant, fertilisation It is assumed that births of boys
family unit child, or adolescent mortality, and that U1 partners survive until of an ovum and girls alternate.
0
(U1, U1, t. Notes: (1) by “(≥11/≤12)” is meant that at the time of with The order shown is where a boy
0 1 8
U1,…) up to fertilisation of the ovum a partner is not older than 12 years of age ensuing is born first (the order can be
2
the possible and not younger than 11 years of age; (2) by “≤1” is denoted the pregnancy. inverted, of course). Note: It is
formation age of a baby born after 8 months in utero but not yet one year old It is assumed assumed that before the second
from it of a (age 0 i.e. ≤1). 2 years pregnancy begins with
new elapses fertilisation of its ovum, there has
monogamous between to have elapsed 2 years (t-t t)
0 1-2
family unit each from the fertilisation of the ovum
from U1 fertilisation that began their first pregnancy,
9
which offers that has corresponding to 8 months of
the (albeit caused a pregnancy+14 months of
incestuous) pregnancy lactation, throughout which 2
repetition of that went to years it is assumed that
the U1 term. fertilisation of other ova does not
0
situation. happen.
Size of unit
membership in
brackets (n= ).
It is assumed
there are no
twin or triplet
births.
U1(n=2) 1m(≥11/≤12);1f(≥11/≤12) t = 0 0 (≥11/≤12)m; (≥11/≤12)f
0 0
U1(n=3) 1m(12);1f(12);1m(0,i.e.≤1) t= (t+1) 1m 12m;12f;0(i.e.≤1)m
1 1 0
U1(n=3) 1m(13);1f(13);1m(1) t = (t+2) 1m 13m;13f;1m;
2 2 0
U1(n=4) 1m(14);1f(14);1m(2);1f(0,i.e.≤1) t = (t+3) 1m;1f 14m;14f;2m;0(i.e.≤1)f (see Note
3 3 0
above)
U1(n=5) 1m(15);1f(15);1m(3);1f(1);1m(0,i.e.≤1) t = (t+5) 1m;1f;1m 15m;15f;3m;1f;0(i.e.≤1)m
4 4 0
U1(n=6) 1m(17);1f(17);1m(5);1f(3);1m(1);1f(0,i.e.≤1) t = (t+7) 1m;1f;1m,1f 17m;17f;5m;3f;1m;0(i.e.≤1)f
5 4 0
U1(n=7) 1m(19);1f(19);1m(7);1f(5);1m(3);1f(1);1m(0,i.e.≤1) t = (t+9) 1m;1f;1m,1f,1m 19m;19f;7m;5f;3m;1f;0(i.e.≤1)m
6 5 0
U1(n=8) 1m(21);1f(21);1m(9);1f(7);1m(5);1f(3);1m(1);1f(0,i.e.≤1) t = (t+11) 1m;1f;1m,1f,1m,1f 21m;21f;9m;7f;5m;3f;1m;
7 6 0
0(i.e.≤1)f
U1(n=9) 1m(23);1f(23);1m(11);1f(9);1m(7);1f(5);1m(3);1f(1);1m(0,i.e.≤1) t = (t+13) 1m;1f;1m,1f,1m,1f,1m 23m;23f;11m;9f;7m;5f;3m;1f;
8 7 0
0(i.e.≤1)m
U1(n=10) 1m(25);1f(25);1m(13);1f(11);1m(9);1f(7);1m(5);1f(3);1m(1);1f(0, t = (t+15) 1m;1f;1m,1f,1m,1f,1m, 25m;25f;13m;11f;9m;7f;5m;3f;1
9 8 0
i.e.≤1) 1f m: 0(i.e.≤1)f
32